suggested a planet, a mineral, anything but the slender,
fine-featured woman with burnished skin and large,
dark, rather sad eyes who looked back at her from the mirror.
Urania! What an idea for a name. Fortunately nobody called
her that anymore; now it was Uri, Miss Cabral, Ms. Cabral,
Dr. Cabral. As far as she could remember, after she left Santo
Domingo (or Ciudad Truyillo—when she left they had not yet
restored the old name to the capital city), no one in Adrian, or
Boston, or Washington, D.C., or New York had called her
Urania as they did at home and at the Santo Domingo
Academy, where the sisters and her classmates pronounced
with absolute correctness the ndiculous name inflicted on her
at birth. Was it his idea or hers? Too late to find out, my girl;
your mother was in heaven and your father condemned to a
living death. You'll never know. Urania! As absurd as insulting
old Santo Domingo de Guzman by calling it Ciudad Trujillo.
Could that have been her father’s idea too?
She waits for the sea to become visible through the window of her room on the ninth floor of the Hotel Jaragua, and
at last she sees it. The darkness fades in a few seconds and the
brilliant blue of the horizon quickly intensifies, beginning the
spectacle she has been anticipating since she woke at four in
spite of the pill she had taken, breaking her rule against sedatives. The dark blue surface of the ocean, marked by streaks of
foam, extends to a leaden sky at the remote line of the horizon,
while here, at the shore, it breaks in resounding, whitecapped
waves against the Sea Walk, the Malecén, where she can make
out sections of the broad road through the palms and almond
trees that line it. Back then, the Hotel Jaragua faced the

7 Urania. Her parents had done her no favor; her name

3
Malecén directly. Now it’s to the side. Her memory brings
back the image—was that the day?—of the little girl holding
her father’s hand as they entered the hotel restaurant so the
two of them could have lunch together. They were given a
table next to the window, and through the sheer lace curtains
Uranita could see the spacious garden and the pool with its
diving boards and swimmers. In the Patio Espajiol, surrounded by glazed tiles and flowerpots filled with carnations,
an orchestra was playing merengues. Was that the day? “No,”
she says aloud. The Jaragua of those days had been tom down
and replaced by this massive shocking-pink structure that had
surprised her so much when she arrived in Santo Domingo
three days ago.

Were you right to come back? You'll be sorry, Urania.
Wasting a week’s vacation, when you never had time to visit all
the cities, regions, countries you would have liked to see—the
mountain ranges and snow-covered lakes of Alaska, for instance—returning to the island you swore you'd never set foot
on again. A symptom of decline? The sentimentality of age?
Curiosity, nothing more. To prove to yourself you can walk
along the streets of this city that is no longer yours, travel
through this foreign country and not have it provoke sadness,
nostalgia, hatred, bitterness, rage in you. Or have you come to
confront the ruin of your father? To learn what effect seeing
him has on you, after so many years. A shudder runs the length
of her body. Urania, Urania! What if after all these years you
discover that behind your determined, disciplined mind, impervious to discouragement, behind the fortress admired and
envied by others, you have a tender, timid, wounded, sentimental heart?

She bursts into laughter. Enough foolishness, my girl.

She puts on sneakers, slacks, a tailored blouse, and pulls
back her hair. She drinks a glass of cold water and is about to
turn on the television to watch CNN but changes her mind.
She remains at the window, looking at the ocean, the Malecén,
and then, turning her head, at the city’s forest of roofs, towers,

4
domes, belfries, and treetops. It’s grown so much! When you
left, in 1961, it sheltered three hundred thousand souls. More
than a million now. It has filled up with neighborhoods, avenues, parks, hotels. The night before, she felt like a foreigner
as she drove a rented car past the condominiums in Bella Vista,
and the immense El Mirador Park, where there were as many
joggers as in Central Park. When she was a girl, the city ended
at the Hotel El Embajador; beyond that point, it was all farms
and fields. The Country Club, where her father took her on
Sundays to swim in the pool, was surrounded by open countryside, not the asphalt, houses, and streetlights that are there
now.

But the colonial city has not been modernized, and neither
has Gazcue, her neighborhood. And she is absolutely certain
her house has hardly changed at all. It must be the same, with
its small garden, old mango tree, and the flamboyan with red
flowers bending over the terrace where they used to have lunch
outdoors on weekends; the sloping roof and the little balcony
outside her bedroom, where she would go to wait for her
cousins Lucinda and Manolita, and, during that last year,
1961, spy on the boy who rode past on his bicycle, watching
her out of the corner of his eye and not daring to speak. Would
it be the same inside? The Austrian clock that sounded the
hours had Gothic numerals and a hunting scene. Would her father be the same? No. You've seen him failing in the photos
sent to you every few months or years by Aunt Adelina and
other relatives who continued to write even though you never
answered their letters.

She drops into an armchair. The rising sun penetrates to
the center of the city; the dome of the National Palace and its
pale ocher walls sparkle gently under a curve of blue. Go now,
soon the heat will be unbearable. She closes her eyes, overcome
by a rare inertia, for she is accustomed to always being active
and not wasting time in what, since her return to Dominican
soil, has occupied her day and night: remembering. “This
daughter of mine is always working, she even repeats her

5
lessons when she’s asleep.” Thats what Senator Agustin
Cabral, Minister Cabral, Egghead Cabral used to say about
you when he boasted to his friends about the girl who won all
the prizes, the student the sisters always held up as an example.
Did he boast to the Chief about Uranita’s scholarly achievements? “Id like so much for you to know her, she has won the
Prize for Excellence every year since she enrolled at Santo
Domingo. It would make her so happy to meet you and shake
your hand. Uranita prays every night for God to protect that
iron health of yours. And for Dofia Julia and Dofia Maria as
well. Do us this honor. The most loyal of your dogs asks, begs,
implores you. You can’t refuse: receive her. Excellency! Chief!”

Do you despise him? Do you hate him? Stull? “Not anymore,” she says aloud. You wouldn’t have come back if the
rancor were still sizzling, the wound still bleeding, the deception still crushing her, poisoning her, the way it did in your
youth, when studying and working became an obsessive defense against remembering. Back then you did hate him. With
every atom of your being, with all the thought and feeling your
body could hold. You wanted him to suffer misfortunes, diseases, accidents. God granted your wish, Urania. Or rather, the
devil did. Isn’t it enough that the cerebral hemorrhage brought
him a living death? A sweet revenge that he has spent the last
ten years in a wheelchair, not walking or talking, depending on
a nurse to eat, lie down, dress, undress, trim his nails, shave,
urinate, defecate? Do you feel avenged? “No.”

She drinks a second glass of water and goes out. It’s seven
in the morning. On the ground floor of the Jaragua she is assaulted by the noise, that atmosphere, familiar by now, of
voices, motors, radios blaring at full volume, merengues, salsas, danzones, boleros, rock, rap, all jumbled together, assailing one another and assailing her with their shrill clamor.
Animated chaos, the profound need in what was once your
people, Urania, to stupefy themselves into not thinking and,
perhaps, not even feeling. An explosion of savage life, immune
to the tide of modernization. Something in Dominicans clings

6
to this pre-rational, magical form: this appetite for noise. (“For
noise, not music.”)

She doesn’t remember a commotion like this in the street
when she was a girl and Santo Domingo was called Ciudad
Trujillo. Perhaps it didn’t exist back then: perhaps, thirty-five
years ago, when the city was three or four times smaller, provincial, isolated, made wary by fear and servility, its soul shrinking
in terrified reverence for the Chief, the Generalissimo, the Benefactor, the Father of the New Nation, His Excellency Dr. Rafael
Leonidas Trujillo Molina, it was quieter and less frenetic. Today, all the clamor of life—car engines, cassettes, records, radios, horns, barks, growls, human voices—seems to resound at
top volume, producing vocal, mechanical, digital, or animal
noise at maximum capacity (dogs bark louder, birds chirp with
more enthusiasm). And New York is famous for being noisy!
Never, in the ten years she has spent in Manhattan, have her
ears been subjected to anything like the brutal, cacophonous
symphony in which she has been immersed for the past three
days.

The sun burns the silvery tops of towering palms, the broken sidewalk with so many holes it looks bombed, the mountains of trash that some women with scarves tied around their
heads sweep up and collect in inadequate bags. “Haitians.”
Theyre silent now, but yesterday they were whispering among
themselves in Creole. A little farther on, she sees two barefoot,
half-naked Haitian men sitting on boxes under dozens of
vividly colored paintings displayed on the wall of a building.
It’s true, the city, perhaps the country, has filled with Haitians.
Back then, it didn’t happen. Isn’t that what Senator Agustin
Cabral said? “You can say what you like about the Chief. History, at least, will recognize that he has created a modern country and put the Haitians in their place. Great ills demand great
remedies!” The Chief found a small country barbarized by wars
among the caudillos, a country without law and order, impoverished, losing its identity, invaded by its starving, ferocious
neighbors. They waded across the Masacre River and came to

7
steal goods, animals, houses, they took the jobs of our agricultural workers, perverted our Catholic religion with their diabolical witchcraft, violated our women, ruined our Western,
Hispanic culture, language, and customs, imposed their
African savagery on us. The Chief cut the Gordian knot:
“Enough!” Great ills demand great remedies! He not only justified the massacre of Haitians in 1937; he considered it a great
accomplishment of the regime. Didn’t he save the Republic |
from being prostituted a second time by that marauding neighbor? What do five, ten, twenty thousand Haitians matter when
it's a question of saving an entire people?

She walks quickly, recognizing landmarks: the Casino de
Giibia, converted into a nightclub, and the bathing beach that
reeks now of sewage; soon she'll reach the corner of the
Malecoén and Avenida Maximo Gomez, the itinerary followed
by the Chief on his evening walks. After the doctors told him it
was good for his heart, he would walk from Radhamés Manor
to Maximo Gémez, with a stop at the house of Dofia Julia, the
Sublime Matriarch, where Uranita once gave a speech and almost couldn’t get the words out, and come down the George
Washington Malecon, turn this corner, and continue on to the
obelisk that imitated the one in Washington, moving at a brisk
pace, surrounded by ministers, advisers, generals, aides,
courtiers, all at a respectful distance, their eyes alert, their
hearts expectant, waiting for a gesture, an expression that
would allow them to approach the Chief, listen to him, be
worthy of his conversation even if it was a reprimand. Anything except being kept at a distance, in the hell of the forgotten. “How many times did you walk with them, Papa? How
many times were you worthy of having him talk to you? And
how many times did you come home saddened because he did
not call to you, fearful you were no longer in the circle of the
elect, that you had fallen among the censured? You always
lived in terror that the story of Anselmo Paulino would be repeated in you. And it was repeated, Papa.”

Urania laughs and a couple in Bermuda shorts walking past

8
in the opposite direction think she is smiling at them: “Good
morning.” She isn’t smiling at them but at the image of Senator Agustin Cabral trotting along this Malecén every evening,
among the deluxe servants, attentive not to the warm breeze,
the sound of the sea, the acrobatics of the gulls, the brilliant
stars of the Caribbean, but to the Chiefs hands, eyes, gestures
that perhaps would call to him, prefer him over all the rest. She
has reached the Agrarian Bank. Then comes Ramfis Manor,
where the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is still located, and the
Hotel Hispaniola. Then a half-turn.

“Calle César Nicol4s Penson, corner of Galvan,” she
thinks. Would she go or would she return to New York without even looking at her house? You'll go in and ask the nurse
for the invalid and go up to the bedroom and the terrace where
they take him for his siesta, the terrace that turned red with the
blossoms from the flamboyan. “Hello, Papa. How are you,
Papa? Don’t you recognize me? Its Urania. Of course, how
could you recognize me? The last time you saw me I was fourteen and now I'm forty-nine. A lot of years, Papa. Wasn’t that
your age the day I left for Adrian? That’s right, you were fortyeight or forty-nine. A man in his prime. Now you're almost
eighty-four. You’re an old man, Papa.” If he’s in any condition
to think, he’s had a lot of time over the years to draw up a balance sheet of his long life. You must have thought about your
ungrateful daughter, who in thirty-five years never answered a
letter, never sent a photo or a birthday card or a Christmas card
or a New Year’s greeting, not even when you had the hemorrhage and aunts, uncles, and cousins thought you would die,
not even then did she come or ask about your health. What a
wicked daughter, Papa. |

The little house on César Nicol4s Penson, corner of
Galvan, probably no longer receives visitors in the entrance
foyer, where it was the custom to place an image of the Virgin
of Altagracia and the bronze plaque that boasted: “In this
house Trujillo is the Chief.” Have you kept it as proof of your
loyalty? No, you must have thrown it in the ocean, like the

9
thousands of Dominicans who bought one and hung it in the
most conspicuous place in the house so that no one would
doubt their fidelity to the Chief, and, when the spell was broken, tried to wipe away the traces, ashamed of what it represented: their cowardice. Pll bet you made yours disappear too,
Papa.

She has reached the Hispaniola. She is sweating, her heart
racing. A double river of cars, vans, and trucks moves along
Avenida George Washington, and it seems to her that they all
have their radios on and the noise will shatter her eardrums.
Occasionally a man’s head will look out of some vehicle and for
an instant her eyes meet a pair of male eyes that look at her
breasts, her legs, her behind. Those looks. She is waiting for a
break in traffic that will let her cross, and again she tells herself,
as she did yesterday and the day before yesterday, that she is on
Dominican soil. In New York nobody looks at a woman with
that arrogance anymore. Measuring her, weighing her, calculating how much flesh there is in each one of her breasts and
thighs, how much hair on her pubis, the exact curve of her buttocks. She closes her eyes, feeling slightly dizzy. In New York
not even Latins—Dominicans, Colombians, Guatemalans—
give such looks. They’ve learned to repress them, realized they
mustn’t look at women the way male dogs look at female dogs,
stallions look at mares, boars look at sows.

In a pause between cars she races across the road. Instead
of making a half-turn and returning to the Jaragua, her steps,
not her will, lead her around the Hispaniola and back along
Independencia, an avenue that, if memory serves, starts here,
with a double line of leafy laurels whose tops meet over the
road, cooling it, until it divides in two and disappears in the
middle of the colonial city. How many times did you stroll,
holding your father’s hand, in the murmuring shade of the laurels along Independencia? The two of you would come down
to the avenue from César Nicolas Penson and walk to Independencia Park. In the Italian ice-cream parlor, on the right, at
the beginning of El Conde, you would eat coconut, mango, or

10
guava ice cream. How proud you felt holding that gentleman’s
hand—Senator Agustin Cabral, Minister Cabral. Everybody
knew who he was. They would approach him, hold out their
hands, doff their hats, bow, and police and soldiers would click
their heels when they saw him pass by. How you must have
missed those years of importance, Papa, when you became just
another poor devil in the crowd. They were satisfied with insulting you in “The Public Forum,” but they didn’t put you in
jail, like Anselmo Paulino. It was what you feared most, wasn’t
it? That one day the Chief would give the order: Egghead goes
to jail! You were lucky, Papa.

After three-quarters of an hour she still has a long way to
go to reach the hotel. If she had taken money, she would go
into a cafeteria to have breakfast and rest. She constantly has to
wipe perspiration from her face. The years, Urania. At fortynine one is no longer young. No matter what shape you’re in
compared with other women. But you’re not ready yet to be
tossed out with the trash, judging by the looks that come from
right and left and rest on her face and body, the insinuating,
greedy, brazen, insolent looks of males accustomed to undressing all the females on the street with their eyes and thoughts.
“Forty-nine years that really become you, Uni,” said Dick Litney, her colleague and friend from the office, in New York, on
her birthday, a bold statement that no man in the firm would
have allowed himself to make unless he, like Dick that night,
had two or three whiskeys under his belt. Poor Dick. He
blushed and became confused when Urania froze him with one
of those slow looks she had used for thirty-five years to confront the gallantries, sudden off-color jokes, witticisms, allusions, or unwelcome moves from men, and sometimes women.

She stops to catch her breath. She feels her heart beating
wildly, her chest rising and falling. She is at the corner of Independencia and Maximo Gomez, in a crowd of men and
women waiting to cross. Her nose registers a range of odors as
great as the endless variety of noises hammering at her ears: the
oil burned by the motors of the buses and escaping through

11
their exhausts, tongues of smoke that dissipate or remain floating over the pedestrians; smells of grease and frying from a
stand where two pans sputter and food and drinks are for sale;
and that dense, indefinable, tropical aroma of decomposing
resins and underbrush, of perspiring bodies, an air saturated
with animal, vegetable, and human essences protected by a sun
that delays their dissolution and passing. A hot odor that
touches some intimate fiber of memory and returns her to
childhood, to multicolored heartsease hanging from roofs and
balconies, to this same Avenida Maximo Gdmez. Mother’s
Day! Of course. May with its brilliant sun, its torrential downpours, its heat. The girls from Santo Domingo Academy selected to bring flowers to Mama Julia, the Sublime Matriarch,
progenitor of the Benefactor and the example and symbol of
Dominican motherhood. They came from school in a bus,
wearing their immaculate white uniforms and accompanied by
Mother Superior and Sister Mary. You burned with curiosity,
pride, affection, respect. You were going to represent the
school in the house of Mama Julia. You were going to recite
for her the poem “Mother and Teacher, Sublime Matriarch,”
which you had written, memorized, and recited dozens of
times in front of the mirror, in front of your classmates, in
front of Lucinda and Manolita, in front of Papa, in front of the
sisters, and which you had silently repeated to yourself to be
sure you would not forget a single syllable. When the glorious
moment arrived in Mama Julia’s large pink house, you were
disconcerted by the military men, ladies, aides, delegations
crowded into gardens, rooms, corridors, overwhelmed by
emotion and tenderness, and when you stepped forward to
within a meter of the old lady smiling benevolently from her
rocking chair and holding the bouquet of roses Mother Superior had just presented to her, your throat constricted and your
mind went blank. You burst into tears. You heard laughter, encouraging words from the ladies and gentlemen who surrounded Mama Julia. The Sublime Matriarch smiled and
beckoned to you. Then Uranita composed herself, dried her

12
tears, stood up straight, and firmly, rapidly, but without the
proper intonation, recited “Mother and Teacher, Sublime Matriarch,” in an unbroken rush. They applauded. Mama Julia
stroked Uranita’s hair, and her mouth, puckered into a thousand wrinkles, kissed her.

At last the light changes. Urania continues on her way,
protected from the sun by the shade of the trees along Maximo
Gomez. She has been walking for an hour. It is pleasant to
move under the laurels, to see the shrubs with the little red
flowers and golden pistils, either cayenne or Christ’s blood, to
be lost in her own thoughts, lulled by the anarchy of voices and
music, yet alert to the uneven places, potholes, depressions, irregularities in the sidewalk, where she is constantly on the
verge of stumbling or stepping on garbage that stray dogs root
through. Were you happy back then? You were, when you
went with a group of students from Santo Domingo Academy
to bring flowers to the Sublime Matriarch on Mother’s Day
and recite the poem for her. Though when the protective,
beautiful figure of her own childhood vanished from the small
house on César Nicol4s Penson, perhaps the very notion of
happiness also disappeared from Urania’s life. But your father
and aunts and uncles—especially Aunt Adelina and Uncle
_ Anjbal, and your cousins Lucindita and Manolita—and old
friends did everything possible to fill your mother’s absence
with pampering and special treats so you wouldn’t feel lonely
or deprived. Your father was both father and mother during
those years. That’s why you loved him so much. That’s why it
hurt you so much, Urania.

When she reaches the rear entrance of the Jaragua, a wide,
barred gate for cars, stewards, cooks, chambermaids, porters,
she doesn’t stop. Where are you going? She hasn’t made any
decision. Her mind, concentrating on her girlhood, her school,
the Sundays when she would go with her Aunt Adelina and
her cousins to the children’s matinee at the Cine Elite, hasn’t
even considered the possibility of not going into the hotel to
shower and have breakfast. Her feet have decided to continue.

13
_ She walks unhesitatingly, certain of the route, among pedestrians and cars impatient for the light to change. Are you sure
you want to go where you’re going, Urania? Now you know
that you'll go, even though you may regret it.

She turns left onto Cervantes and walks toward Bolivar,
recognizing as if in a dream the one- and two-story chalets
with fences and gardens, open terraces and garages, which
awaken in her a familiar feeling, these deteriorating images that
have been preserved, somewhat faded, chipped along the
edges, made ugly with additions and patchwork, small rooms
built on flat roofs or assembled at the sides, in the middle of
the gardens, to house offspring who marry and cannot live on
their own and come home to add to the families, demanding
more space. She passes laundries, pharmacies, florist shops,
cafeterias, plaques for dentists, doctors, accountants, and
lawyers. On Avenida Bolivar she walks as if she were trying to
overtake someone, as if she were about to break into a run.
Her heart is in her mouth. You'll collapse at any moment.
When she reaches Rosa Duarte she veers left and begins to run.
But the effort is too much and she walks again, more slowly
now, very close to the off-white wall of a house in case she becomes dizzy again and has to lean on something until she
catches her breath. Except for a ridiculously narrow four-story
building where the house with the spiked fence used to be, the
house that belonged to Dr. Estanislas, who took out her tonsils, nothing has changed; she would even swear that the maids
sweeping the gardens and the fronts of the houses are going to
greet her: “Hello, Uranita. How are you, honey? Girl, how
you've grown. Mother of God, where are you off to in such a
hurry?”

The house hasn’t changed too much either, though she recalled the gray of its walls as intense and now it’s dull, stained,
peeling. The garden is a thicket of weeds, dead leaves, withered
grass. Nobody has watered or pruned it in years. There’s the
mango. Was that the flamboyan? It must have been, when it had
leaves and flowers; now, it’s a trunk with bare; rachitic branches.

14
She leans against the wrought-iron gate that opens to the
garden. The flagstone path has weeds growing through the
cracks and is stained by mildew, and at the entrance to the terrace there is a defeated chair with a broken leg. The yellow cretonne-covered furniture is gone. And the little polished glass
lamp in the corner that lit the terrace and attracted butterflies
during the day and buzzing insects at night. The little balcony
off her bedroom no longer is covered by mauve heartsease: it is
a cement projection stained with rust.

At the back of the terrace, a door opens with a long groan.
A woman in a white uniform stares at her curiously.

“Are you looking for someone?”

Urania cannot speak; she is too agitated, too shaken, too
frightened. She remains mute, looking at the stranger.

“Can I help you?” the woman asks.

“lm Urania,” she says at last. “Agustin Cabral’s daughter.”

15
