a When Dr. Vélez Santana and Bienvenido Gar7 cia, General Juan Tomas Diaz’s son-in-law,
drove Pedro Livio Cedefio to the International
Clinic, the inseparable trio—Amadito, Antonio Imbert, and
Turk Estrella Sadhala— reached a decision: it made no sense to
go on waiting there until General Diaz, Luis Amiama, and Antonio de la Maza found General José René Roman. What they
should do is find a doctor to treat their wounds, then change
their soiled clothes and look for a place to hide until things
were settled. Was there a trustworthy doctor they could go to
at this hour? It was close to midnight.

“My cousin Manuel,” said Imbert. “Manuel Durdn Barreras.
He lives nearby and his office is next to his house. He can be
trusted.”

Tony’s expression was somber, which surprised Amadito.
When Salvador was driving them to Dr. Duran Barreras’s
house—the city was quiet and the streets were empty of traffic,
the news hadn’t broken yet—he asked:

“Why the long face?”

“This is all fucked up,” Imbert replied quietly.

Turk and the lieutenant looked at him.

“Do you think it’s normal for Pupo Romdn not to show
up?” he added between clenched teeth. “There are only two explanations. Either they found him out and arrested him or he
got scared. In either case, we’re fucked.”

“But we killed Trujillo, Tony!” Amadito tried to cheer him
up. “Nobody’s going to bring him back to life.”

“Don’t think Pm sorry about that,” said Imbert. “The truth
is, I never had much faith in the coup, the civilian-military
junta, all those dreams of Antonio de la Maza. I always saw us

  

322
as being on a suicide mission.”

“You should have said so earlier, brother,” Amadito joked.
“I would have written my will.”

Turk dropped them off at Dr. Duran Barreras’s place and
went to his own house; since the caliés would soon find his
abandoned car on the highway, he wanted to alert his wife and
children and get some clothes and money. Dr. Duran Barreras
was in bed. He came out in a robe, yawning. His jaw dropped
when Imbert explained why they were covered with mud and
blood, and what they wanted from him. For long seconds he
looked at them, astounded, his large bony face, with its full
beard, contorted in bewilderment. Amadito could see the doctor’s Adam’s apple moving up and down. From time to time he
rubbed his eyes as if he were seeing ghosts. At last he reacted:

“The first thing is to treat you. Let’s go to my office.”

Amadito was the most seriously hurt. A bullet had hit his
ankle; you could see the entrance and exit wounds, and splinters of bone protruding from them. His foot and part of his
ankle were deformed by swelling.

“IT don’t know how you can stand with that shattered
ankle,” the doctor remarked as he disinfected the wound.

“T didn’t realize until now that it hurt,” replied the lieutenant.

In the euphoria of what had happened, he had hardly paid
attention to his foot. But now, the pain was there, along with a
fiery tingling that went up to his knee. The doctor bandaged
the wound, gave him an injection, and handed him a vial of
pills to take every four hours.

“Do you have somewhere to go?” Imbert asked while he
was being treated.

Amadito thought immediately of his Aunt Meca. She was
one of his eleven great-aunts, the one who had pampered him
most since he had been a little boy. The old woman lived
alone, in a wooden house filled with flowerpots, on Avenida
San Martin, not far from Independencia Park.

“The first place they'll look for us will be with our relatives,” Tony warned. “A close friend would be better.”

323
“All my friends are in the military, brother. Staunch Trujillistas.” |

He could not understand why Imbert looked so worried
and pessimistic. Pupo Roman would show up and they would
put the Plan in effect, he was sure about that. And anyway,
with the death of Trujillo, the regime would collapse like a
house of cards.

“T think I can help you, son,” Dr. Duran Barreras intervened. “The mechanic who fixes my station wagon has a little
farm he wants to rent. Near the Ozama extension. Shall I talk
to him?” .

He did, and it turned out to be surprisingly easy. The mechanic was named Antonio (Tofio) Sanchez, and in spite of the
hour he came to the house as soon as the doctor called. They
told him the truth. “Damn, tonight Pll get drunk!” he exclaumed. It was an honor to let them have his place. The lieutenant would be safe, there were no close neighbors. He would
take him in his jeep and make sure he had food.

“How can I ever repay you, Doc?” Amadito asked Duran
Barreras.

“By taking care of yourself, son,” and the doctor shook his
hand, looking at him with compassion. “I wouldn’t want to be.
in your skin if they catch you.”

“That won’t happen, Doc.”

He had used up his ammunition, but Imbert had a good |
supply and gave him a handful of bullets. The lieutenant
loaded his .45 and made his farewells by stating:

“Now I feel safer.”

“See you soon, Amadito.” Tony embraced him. “Your
friendship is one of the good things that’s happened to me.”

When they left for the Ozama extension in Tofo Sénchez’s
jeep, the city had changed. They passed a couple of Beetles
filled with caliés, and as they were crossing Radhamés Bridge
they saw a truck pull up, carrying guards, who jumped out and
set up a roadblock.

“They know the Goat is dead,” said Amadito. “I wish I

324
could have seen their faces when they found out they had lost
their Chief.”

“Nobody’s going to believe it until they see and smell the
body,” the mechanic remarked. “Shit, this’ll be a different
country without Trujillo!”

The farm was a crude building in the middle of ten
hectares of uncultivated land. The house was practically unfurnished: a cot with a mattress, a few broken chairs, and a demijohn of distilled water. “Tomorrow I'll bring you something to
eat,” Tofio Sanchez promised. “Don’t worry. Nobody will
come here.”

The house had no electricity. Amadito took off his shoes
and lay down, fully dressed, on the cot. The sound of Tofio
Sanchez’s jeep grew fainter until it disappeared. He was tired,
and his heel and ankle hurt, but he felt a great serenity. With
Trujillo dead, a great burden had been lifted from him. The
guilt that had been gnawing at his soul ever since he was forced
to kill that poor man—Luisa Gils brother, my God! —would
start to fade away now, he was sure. He would become the person he used to be, a man who could look in the mirror and not
feel disgust with the face he saw reflected there. Ah, shit, if he
could finish off Abbes Garcia and Colonel Roberto Figueroa
Carrion too, nothing else would matter. He would die in peace.
He curled up, changed position several times, trying to get
comfortable, but couldn’t fall asleep. He heard noises in the
- dark, scurrying sounds. At dawn the excitement and pain eased,
and he managed to sleep a few hours. He woke with a start.
He'd had a nightmare but couldn’t remember his dream.

He spent the hours of the new day peering out the windows, watching for the jeep. There was nothing to eat in the
house, but he wasn’t hungry. His occasional drinks of distilled
water seemed to fill his stomach. But he was tormented by solitude, boredom, lack of news. If there were only a radio at least!
He resisted the temptation to go out and walk to some inhabited place and find a newspaper. Control your impatience, boy,
Tofio Sanchez would come soon.

325
He didn’t come until the third day. He appeared at noon
on June 2, the day that Amadito, faint with hunger and desperate for news, turned thirty-two. Tofio was no longer the
easygoing, effusive, self-confident man who had brought him
here. He was pale, devoured by anxiety, unshaven, and stammering. He handed him a thermos of hot coffee and some
sausage and cheese sandwiches, which Amadito wolfed down
as he heard the bad news. His picture was in all the papers and
was shown frequently on television, along with those of
_ General Juan Tomas Diaz, Antonio de la Maza, Estrella Sadhald,
Fifi Pastoriza, Pedro Livio Cedefio, Antonio Imbert, Hudscar
Tejeda, and Luis Amiama. Pedro Livio Cedefio had been taken
prisoner, and he had given them up. They were offering huge
amounts of pesos to anyone with information about them.
There was a fierce persecution of everyone suspected of being
anti-Truyillista. Dr. Duran Barreras had been arrested the night
before; Tofio thought that if he was tortured, he’d betray them
all in the end. It was extremely dangerous for Amadito to stay
here.

“I wouldn’t stay even if it was safe, Tofio,” the lieutenant
said. “I'd rather be killed than have to spend another three days
alone like this.”

“Where will you go?”

He thought of his cousin Maximo Mieses, who had a
place along the Duarte highway. But Tofio discouraged him:
the highways were full of patrols and they were searching every vehicle. He’d never get to his cousin’s farm without being
recognized.

“You have no idea what’s going on.” Tofio Sanchez was in
a rage. “Hundreds of people have been arrested. They've gone
crazy, looking for all of you.”

“They can go to hell,” said Amadito. “Let them kill me.
The Goat’s gone and they can’t bring him back. Don’t worry,
brother. You’ve done a lot for me. Can you get me to the highway? Pll go back to the capital on foot.”

“Im scared, but not so scared that Pd leave you out in the

326
cold, ’m not that much of a bastard,” said Tofio, who had
calmed down. He patted him on the shoulder. “Let’s go, Pil
take you. If they catch us, you put a gun to my head, okay?”

He settled Amadito in the back of the jeep, under a piece
of canvas, on top of which he placed some coils of rope and
gasoline cans that slammed against the hunched-over lieutenant. The position gave him cramps and made the pain in his
foot worse; every pothole in the road battered his shoulders,
back, and head. But he never let go of his .45; he held it in his
right hand, with the safety off. Whatever happened, they
wouldn’t take him alive. He wasn’t afraid. In fact, he didn’t
have much hope of getting out of this. But it didn’t matter. He
hadn’t felt this kind of serenity since that disastrous night with
Johnny Abbes.

“We're coming up on the Radhamés Bridge,” he heard a
terrified Tofio Sanchez say. “Don’t move, don’t make a sound,
there’s a patrol.”

The jeep stopped. He heard voices, footsteps, and after a
pause, friendly exclamations: “Hey, it’s you, Tofito.” “What's
up, compadre?” They authorized him to continue without
searching the car. They must have been in the middle of the
bridge when he heard Tonto Sanchez again: |

“The captain was my friend Skinny Rasputin. Shit, what a
piece of luck! My balls are still up around my ears, Amadito.
Where should I drop you?”

“On Avenida San Martin.”

A short while later, the jeep braked to a stop.

“I don’t see caliés anywhere, now’s a good time,” Tofo
said. “God be with you, boy.”

The lieutenant lifted off the canvas and the cans and
jumped to the sidewalk. A few cars were passing, but he saw
no pedestrians except for a man with a stick who was walking
away, his back to him.

“God bless you, Tofio.”

_ “And be with you,” Tofio Sanchez repeated, pulling away.

Aunt Meca’s little one-story house—made of wood, with a

327
fence, no garden, but surrounded by pots of geraniums in the
windows—was about twenty meters away, which Amadito
strode across, limping, not concealing his revolver. As soon as
he knocked the door opened. Aunt Meca didn’t have time to
be astonished, because the lieutenant rushed in, moving her
aside and closing the door behind him.

“T don’t know what to do, where to hide, Aunt Meca. Itll
be for one or two days, until I can find a safe place.”

His aunt kissed and embraced him, affectionate as always.
She didn’t seem as frightened as Amadito had feared.

“They must have seen you, honey. How could you come in
broad daylight? My neighbors are raging Trujillistas. You're
covered with blood. And those bandages? Are you wounded?”

Amadito peered at the street through the curtains. There
were no people on the sidewalks. Doors and windows across
the street were closed.

“Ever since the news broke I’ve been praying to St. Peter
Claver for you, Amadito, he’s such a miraculous saint,” his
Aunt Meca said, cradling his face in her hands. “When they
showed you on television and in El Caribe, some of my neighbors came to ask me questions, to see what they could find out.
I hope they haven’t seen you. You look awful, honey. Do you
want anything?”

“Yes, Aunt Meca,” he said with a laugh, caressing her
white hair. “A shower and something to eat. I’m starving.”

“And it’s your birthday!” Aunt Meca recalled, and hugged
him again.

She was a small, energetic old woman, with a resolute expression and deep, kind eyes. She had him take off his pants and
shirt, so she could wash them, and while Amadito showered—it
was a pleasure fit for the gods—she heated up all the leftovers in
the kitchen. Wearing his shorts and undershirt, the lieutenant
found a banquet spread on the table: fried green plantains, fried
sausage, rice, deep-fried pieces of chicken. He ate with good appetite, listening to his Aunt Meca’s stories. How it upset the
family when they learned he was one of Trujillo’s assassins. The

328
caliés had come to the houses of three of her sisters in the middle of the night, asking about him. They hadn’t come here yet.

“If you don’t mind, [d like to sleep for a while, Aunt
Meca. I’ve barely closed my eyes for days. I was too bored. ’m
happy to be here with you.”

She led him to her bedroom and had him lie down on her
bed, under an image of St. Peter Claver, her favorite saint. She
closed the shutters to darken the room, and said that while he
was napping, she would wash and iron his uniform. “And we'll
think of a place where you can hide, Amadito.” She kissed him
repeatedly on his brow and head: “And I thought you were
such a good Truyillista, honey.” He fell asleep immediately. He
dreamed that Turk Sadhala and Antonio Imbert were calling
him repeatedly: “Amadito, Amadito!” They were trying to tell
him something important, but he couldn’t understand their
gestures or words. It seemed to him he had just closed his eyes
when he felt someone shaking him. There was Aunt Meca, so
pale and frightened he felt sorry for her, and guilt-ridden for
having involved her in this.

“They're here, they’re here,” she said in a strangled voice,
eosin herself. “Ten or twelve Beetles, honey, and lots of
calies

He was lucid now and knew perfectly well what to do. He
made the old woman lie down on the floor, behind the bed, |
against the wall, at the feet of St. Peter Claver.

“Don’t move, don’t get up no matter what,” he told her. “I
love you very much, Aunt Meca.”

He had the .45 in his hand. Barefoot, dressed only in his
regulation khaki undershirt and shorts, he hugged the wall and
crept to the front door. He peered through the curtains, staying out of sight. It was an overcast afternoon, and in the distance he could hear a bolero. Black SIM Volkswagens filled the
street. At least twenty caliés armed with submachine guns and
revolvers were surrounding the house. Three men were at the
door. One of them pounded it with his fist, making the wood
quiver, and shouted at the top of his voice:

329
“We know yourre in there, Garcia Guerrero! Come out
with your hands up or you'll die like a dog!”

“Not like a dog, no,” he murmured. As he opened the
door with his left hand, he fired with his right. He managed to
empty the clip of his pistol and saw the man who had urged
him to surrender fall, bellowing, shot in the middle of the
chest. But, annihilated by an untold number of bullets from
submachine guns and revolvers, he did not see that in addition
to killing one cali¢, he had wounded two others before dying
himself. He did not see how his body was tied—the way
hunters tie down deer killed in the Cordillera Central—to the
roof of a Volkswagen, and how Johnny Abbes’s men, who
were inside the Beetle, held on to his ankles and wrists and displayed him to bystanders in Independencia Park, through
which his killers drove in triumph, while other caliés entered
the house, found Aunt Meca where he had left her, more dead
than alive, and shoving and spitting at her, took her to SIM
headquarters, at the same time that a greedy mob, under the
mocking or impassive eyes of the police, began to loot the
house, making off with everything the calés hadn’t stolen first,
and after looting the house they destroyed it, tore down the
walls, demolished the roof, and finally burned it until, at nightfall, there was nothing left but ashes and charred rubble.

330
