(%, When the Chief’s limousine pulled away and

| left him in the stinking mudhole, General
: José René Roman was trembling from head
to toe, like the soldiers he had seen dying of malaria in Dajabén, a garrison on the Haitian-Dominican border, at the
start of his military career. For many years Trujillo had been
brutal with him before family and strangers, making him feel
how little respect he had for him, using any excuse to call him
an idiot. But he had never carried his contempt and insults to
the extremes he had shown tonight.

He waited for the trembling to pass before walking to San
Isidro Air Base. The guard on duty was shocked to see the head
of the Armed Forces appear on foot and covered in mud, in the
middle of the night. General Virgilio Garcia Trujillo, commander of San Isidro and Roman’s brother-in-law —he was Mireya’s
twin brother—was not there, but the Minister of the Armed
Forces called all the other officers together and reprimanded
them: the broken pipe that had enraged His Excellency had to
be repaired immediately or the punishments would be severe.
The Chief would come back to check, and they all knew he was
implacable with regard to cleanliness. He ordered a jeep and
driver to take him home; he didn’t change or clean up before
he left.

In the jeep, on the way to Ciudad Trujillo, he told himself
that his trembling was not really due to the Chief’s insults but
to the tension he had felt since the phone call letting him know
the Benefactor was angry with him. Throughout the day, he
told himself a thousand times over that it was impossible, absolutely impossible, that he had found out about the conspiracy plotted by his compadre Luis Amiama and his close friend

363

 
General Juan Tomas Diaz. He wouldn’t have phoned; he
would have had him arrested and he’d be in La Cuarenta now,
or El Nueve. And yet the little worm of doubt did not allow
him to eat a mouthful at supper. Well, in spite of the terrible
time he had been put through, it was a relief that the Chief's
insults were caused by a broken sewage pipe and not a conspiracy. The mere thought of Trujillo finding out that he was one
of the conspirators made his blood run cold.

He could be accused of many things, but not cowardice.
From the time he was a cadet, and in all his postings, he had
shown physical daring and displayed a courage in the face of
danger that earned him a reputation for machismo among offcers and subordinates. He was always good at boxing, with
gloves or bare fists. He never allowed anyone to treat him with
disrespect. But, like so many officers, so many Dominicans, before Trujillo his valor and sense of honor disappeared, and he
was overcome by a paralysis of his reason and his muscles, by
servile obedience and reverence. He often had asked himself
why the mere presence of the Chief—his high-pitched voice
and the fixity of his gaze—annihilated him morally.

Because he knew the power Trujillo had over his character,
General Roman’s immediate response to Luis Amiama when
he first spoke to him, five and a half months earlier, about a
conspiracy to put an end to the regime, had been:

“Abduct him? That’s bullshit! As long as he’s alive nothing
will change. You have to kill him.”

They were on Luis Amiama’s banana plantation in
Guayubin, Montecristi, sitting on a sunny terrace and watching the muddy water of the Yaque River as it flowed past. His
compadre explained that he and Juan Tomas were organizing
this operation to keep the regime from ruming the country
completely and precipitating another Cuban-style Communist
revolution. It was a serious plan that had the support of the
United States. Henry Dearborn, John Banfield, and Bob
Owen, at the legation, had given their formal backing and
made the head of the CIA in Ciudad Trujillo, Lorenzo D.

364
Berry (“The owner of Wimpy’s Supermarket?” “That’s right”),
responsible for supplying them with money, weapons, and explosives. The United States, uneasy about Trujillo’s excesses
ever since the attempt on the life of the Venezuelan President,
Roémulo Betancourt, wanted to get rid of him; at the same
time, they wanted to be sure he would not be replaced by a second Fidel Castro. This was why they were backing a serious,
clearly anti-Communist group that would establish a civilianmilitary junta and hold elections within six months. Amiama,
Juan Tomas Diaz, and the gringos were in agreement: Pupo
Romién should preside over the junta. There was no one better
to secure the cooperation of the military and an orderly transition to democracy.

“Abduct him, ask him to resign?” Pupo was appalled.
“You've got the wrong country and the wrong man, compadre. Don’t you know him? He'll never let you take him alive.
And you'll never get him to resign. You have to kill him.”

The driver of the jeep, a sergeant, was silent, and Roman
took deep drags from a Lucky Strike, his favorite brand of
cigarettes. Why had he agreed to join the conspiracy? Unlike
Juan Tomas, in disgrace and cashiered from the Army, he had
everything to lose. He had reached the highest position a military man could aspire to, and though things weren’t going well
for him in business, his farms still belonged to him. The danger
that they would be seized had disappeared with the payment of
four hundred thousand pesos to the Agrarian Bank. The Chief
didn’t cover the debt out of respect for his person, but because
of his arrogant feeling that the family must never look bad, that
the image of the Trujillos and their relations must always be
spotless. And it wasn’t an appetite for power, the prospect of
being named Provisional President of the Dominican Republic—and the possibility, which was very real, of then becoming
the elected President—that led him to give his support to the
conspiracy. It was rancor, the accumulated effect of the infinite
offenses to which Trujillo had subjected him since his marriage
to Mireya, which had made him a member of the privileged,

365
untouchable clan. That was why the Chief had promoted him
over other men, appointed him to important positions, and occasionally presented him with gifts of cash or sinecures that allowed him to enjoy a high standard of living. But he had to pay
for the favors and distinctions by accepting arrogance and
abuse. “And that matters more,” he thought.

During these five and a half months, each time the Chief
humiliated him, General Roman, as he did now while the jeep
was crossing Radhamés Bridge, told himself that he soon
would feel like a whole man, with his own life, even though
Trujillo went out of his way to make him feel absolutely
worthless. Luis Amiama and Juan Tomds might not suspect it,
but he was in the conspiracy to prove to the Chief that he wasmt the incompetent fool Trujillo believed him to be.

His conditions were very concrete. He would not lift a finger until he saw with his own eyes that the Chief had been executed. Only then would he proceed to mobilize troops and
capture the Trujillo brothers and the officers and civilians most
involved with the regime, starting with Johnny Abbes Garcia.
Luis Amiama and General Diaz must not mention to anyone—
not even the head of the action group, Antonio de la Maza—
that he was part of the conspiracy. There would be no written
messages or telephone calls, only direct conversations. He
would cautiously begin to place officers he trusted in key posts,
so that when the day arrived all the installations would obey
his orders. |

This is what he had done, naming his classmate and close
friend General César A. Oliva as the head of the Fortress of Santiago de los Caballeros, the second largest in the country. He also
arranged to appoint General Garcia Urbdez, a loyal ally, as commander of the Fourth Brigade, stationed in Dajabén. And he was
counting on General Guarionex Estrella, commander of the Second Brigade, in La Vega. He wasn’t very friendly with Guaro, an
avid Trujillista, but he was the brother of Turk Estrella Sadhalé,
who was in the action group, and it was logical to suppose he
would side with his brother. He hadn’t confided his secret to any

366
of those generals; he was too clever to risk a denunciation. But he
was sure that as events unfolded, they would all come over without hesitation

When would it happen? Very soon, most likely. On his
birthday, May 24, just six days earlier, Luis Amiama and Juan
Tomas Diaz, whom he had invited to his country house, assured
him that everything was ready. Juan Tomas was categorical:
“Any day now, Pupo.” They told him that President Joaquin
Balaguer had probably agreed to be part of the civilian-military
junta over which he would preside. He asked for details, but
they couldn’t give him any; the approach had been made by
Dr. Rafael Batlle Vifias, married to Indiana, Antonio de la
Maza’s cousin, and Balaguer’s principal physician. He had
sounded out the puppet president, asking if, in the event Trujillo
disappeared suddenly, “he would collaborate with the patriots.” His reply was cryptic: “According to the Constitution, if
Trujillo were to disappear, I would have to be taken into account.” Was this a good piece of news? That suave, astute little
man had always inspired in Pupo. Roman the instinctive distrust he felt for bureaucrats and intellectuals. It was impossible
to know what he was thinking; behind his affable manners and
eloquence lay an enigma. But, in any case, what his friends said
was true: Balaguer’s involvement would reassure the Yankees.

By the time he reached his house in Gazcue, it was ninethirty. He sent the jeep back to San Isidro. Mireya and his son
Alvaro, a young lieutenant in the Army who had come to visit
them on his day off, were alarmed at seeing him in that condition. He explained what had happened as he removed his dirty
clothes. He had Mireya telephone her brother and told General Virgilio Garcia about the Chief’s outburst:“T’m sorry, Virgilio, but Pm obliged to reprimand you. Come to my office
tomorrow, before ten o’clock.”

“Shit, and all for a broken pipe,” Virgilio exclaimed in
amusement. “The man can’t control his temper!”

He took a shower and soaped his entire body. When he
came out of the tub, Mireya handed him clean pajamas and a

367
silk bathrobe. She stayed with him while he dried himself,
splashed on cologne, and dressed. Contrary to what many people believed, beginning with the Chief, he hadn’t married
Mireya out of self-interest. He had fallen in love with the dark,
timid girl, and risked his life by courting her despite Trujillo’s
opposition. They were a happy couple, and in twenty years together they'd had no fights or separations. As he talked to
Mireya and Alvaro at the table—he wasn’t hungry, all he
wanted was rum on the rocks—he wondered what his wife’s
reaction would be. Would she side with her husband or with
the clan? His doubts mortified him. He had often seen Mireya
indignant at the Chief’s insulting manner; perhaps that would
tip the balance in his favor. Besides, what Dominican woman
wouldn’t like to be the First Lady?

When supper was over, Alvaro went out to have a beer
with some friends. Mireya and he went up to their bedroom
and turned on the Dominican Voice. There was a program of
dance music with popular singers and orchestras. Before the
sanctions, the station would bring in the best Latin American
performers, but due to the crisis of the past year, almost all the
programs on Petdn Trujillo’s television station featured local
artists. As they listened to the merengues and danzones of the
Generalissimo Orchestra, conducted by Maestro Luis Alberti,
Mireya remarked sadly that she hoped the problems with the
Church would end soon. There was a bad atmosphere, and her
friends, when they played canasta, talked about rumors of a
revolution and Kennedy sending in the Marines. Pupo reassured
her: the Chief would get his way this time too, and the country
would be peaceful and prosperous again. His voice sounded so
false that he stopped talking, pretending he had to cough.

A short time later, there was the screech of brakes and the
frantic sound of a car’s horn. The general jumped out of bed
and went to the window. He made out the sharp-edged silhouette of General Arturo (Razor) Espaillat coming out of the
automobile that had just pulled up. As soon as he saw his face,
looking yellow in the light of the streetlamp, his heart skipped

368
a beat: it’s happened.

“What’s going on, Arturo?” he asked, leaning his head out
the window.

“Something very serious,” said General Espaillat, coming
closer. “I was at the Pony with my wife, and the Chief’s
Chevrolet drove past. A little while later I heard shooting. I
went to see what was happening and ran into a gunfight, right
in the middle of the highway.”

- “Pm coming down, ’m coming down,” shouted Pupo
Roman. Mireya was putting on her robe as she crossed herself:
“My God, my uncle, don’t let it be true, sweet Jesus.”

From that moment on, and in all the minutes and hours that
followed, when his fate was decided, and the fate of his family,
the conspirators, and, in the long run, the Dominican Republic,
General José René Roman always knew with absolute lucidity
what he should do. Why did he do exactly the opposite? He
would ask himself the question many times in the next few
months, without finding an answer. He knew, as he went
down the stairs, that under these circumstances the only sensible thing to do, if he cared anything about his life and did
not want the conspiracy to fail, was to open the door for the
former head of the SIM, the military man most involved in
the regime’s criminal operations, the one responsible for
countless abductions, acts of extortion, tortures, and murders ordered by Trujillo, and empty his revolver into him. In
order to avoid going to prison or being murdered, Razor’s
record left him no alternative but to maintain a doglike loyalty
to Trujillo and the regime.

Although he knew this all too well, he opened the door
and let in General Espaillat and his wife, whom he kissed on
the cheek and tried to reassure, for Ligia Fernandez de Espaillat had lost her self-control and was stammering incoherently.
Razor gave him precise details: as his car approached, he heard
deafening gunfire from revolvers, carbines, and submachine
guns, and in the powder flashes he recognized the Chief’s Bel
Air and could see a figure on the highway, shooting, maybe it

369
was Trujillo. He couldn’t help him: he was in civilian clothes,
he wasn’t armed, and fearing that Ligia might be hit by a stray
bullet, he had come here. It happened fifteen minutes ago,
twenty at the most.

“Wait for me, Pil get dressed.” Roman ran up the stairs,
followed by Mireya, who was waving her hands and shaking
her head as if she were deranged.

“We have to let Uncle Blacky know,” she exclaimed, while
he was putting on his everyday uniform. He saw her run to the
telephone and dial, not giving him time to open his mouth.
And though he knew he ought to stop that call, he didn’t. He
took the receiver and, as he buttoned his shirt, he told General
Héctor Bienvenido Trujillo:

“T’ve just been informed of a possible attempt on His Excellency’s life, on the San Cristébal highway. I’m going there
now. I'll keep you apprised.”

He finished dressing and went downstairs, carrying a
loaded M-1 carbine. Instead of firing and finishing off Razor,
he spared his life again, and nodded when Espaillat, his little
rat's eyes devoured by worry, advised him to alert the General
Staff and order a nationwide curfew. General Roman called the
December 18 Fortress and directed all the garrisons to impose
a rigorous quartering of troops and to close all exits from the
capital, and he told the commanders in the interior that he
would shortly be in telephone or radio contact with them regarding a matter of utmost urgency. He was wasting precious

time, but he had to act in this way, which, he thought, would
clear away any doubts about him in Razor’s mind.

“Let’s go,” he said to Espaillat.

“’m going to take Ligia home,” he replied. “Pll meet you .
on the highway. At about kilometer seven.”

When General Roman drove away, at the wheel of his own
car, he knew he ought to go immediately to the house of General
Juan Tomas Diaz, just a few meters from his own, to confirm if
the assassination had been successful—he was sure it had—and
start the process of the coup. There was no escape; he was an

370
accomplice regardless of whether Trujillo was dead or
wounded. But instead of going to see Juan Tomas or Amiama,
he drove his car to Avenida George Washington. Near the
Fairground he saw someone signaling to him from a car: it was
Colonel Marcos Antonio Jorge Moreno, head of Trujillo’s personal bodyguards, accompanied by General Pou.

“We're worried,” Moreno shouted, leaning his head out
the window. “His Excellency hasn’t arrived in San Cristébal.”

“There was an attempt on his life,” Roman informed them.
“Follow me!”

At kilometer seven, when, in the beams from Moreno’s and
Pou’s flashlights, he recognized the bullet-riddled Chevrolet, saw
_ the smashed glass and bloodstains and debris on the asphalt, he
knew the attempt had been successful. He had to be dead after
that kind of gunfire. And therefore he ought to subdue, recruit,
or kill Moreno and Pou, two self-proclaimed Trujillistas, and,
before Espaillat and other military men arrived, race to the December 18 Fortress, where he would be safe. But he didn’t do
that either; instead, displaying the same consternation as
Moreno and Pou, he searched the area with them and was glad
when the colonel found a revolver in the underbrush. Moments later Razor was there, patrols and guards arrived, and he
_ ordered them to continue the search. He would be at the head. quarters of the General Staff.
| While he sat in his official car and was taken by his driver,
First Sergeant Morones, to the December 18 Fortress, he
smoked several Lucky Strikes. Luis Amiama and Juan Tomds
must be desperately looking for him, dragging the Chief’s
body around with them. It was his duty to send them some
kind of signal. But instead of doing that, when he reached the
headquarters of the General Staff he instructed the guards not
to allow in any civilians, no matter who they were.

He found the Fortress in a state of bustling activity inconceivable at this hour under normal circumstances. As he hurried
up the stairs to his command post and responded in kind to the
officers who saluted him, he heard questions—“An attempted

371
landing across from the Fairground, General?”—which he did
not stop to answer.

He went into his office in a state of agitation, feeling his
heart pound, and a simple glance at the twenty or so highranking officers gathered there was enough to let him know
that despite the lost opportunities, he still had a chance to put
the Plan into effect. The officers who, when they saw him,
clicked their heels and saluted were a group representing the
high command, friends, for the most part, and they were waiting for his orders. They knew or intuited that a terrifying vacuum had just been created, and, educated in the tradition of
discipline and total dependence on the Chief, they expected
him to assume command, with clarity of purpose. Fear and
hope were on the faces of Generals Fernando A. Sanchez, Radhamés Hungria, Fausto Caamafio, and Félix Hermida, |
Colonels Rivera Cuesta and Cruzado Pifia, Majors Wessin y
Wessin, Pagén Montds, Saldafia, Sanchez Pérez, Fernandez
Dominguez, and Hernando Ramirez. They wanted him to rescue them from an uncertainty against which they had no defense. A speech delivered in the voice of a leader who has his
balls in the right place and knows what he is doing, explaining
that in this dire circumstance the disappearance or death of
Trujillo, for reasons yet to be determined, provided the Republic with a providential opportunity for change. Above all,
they must avoid chaos, anarchy, a Communist revolution and
its corollary, occupation by the Americans. They, who were patriots by vocation and profession, had the duty to act. The country had touched bottom, placed under quarantine because of
the excesses of a regime which, although in the past it had performed services that could never be repaid, had degenerated
into a tyranny that provoked universal revulsion. It was necessary to move events forward, with an eye to the future. If they
followed him, together they would close the abyss that had begun to open before them. As head of the Armed Forces he _
would preside over a civilian-military junta, composed of —
prominent figures and responsible for guaranteeing a transition

372
to democracy, which would allow the lifting of sanctions imposed by the United States and elections under the supervision
of the OAS. The junta had the approval of Washington, and
from them, the leaders of the most prestigious institution in
the country, he expected cooperation. He knew his words
would have been greeted with applause, and whoever had
_ doubts would have been won over by the conviction of the
others. It would be easy then to order executive officers like
Fausto Caamafio and Félix Hermida to arrest the Trujillo
brothers and round up Abbes Garcia, Colonel Figueroa Carrin, Captain Candito Torres, Clodoveo Ortiz, Américo Dante
Minervino, César Rodriguez Villeta, and Alicinio Pefia Rivera,
thereby immobilizing the machinery of the SIM.

But, though he knew with certainty what he ought to do
and say at that moment, he didn’t do that either. After a few
seconds of hesitant silence, he limited himself to informing the
officers, in vague, broken, stammering terms, that in view of
the attempt on the person of the Generalissimo, the Armed
Forces must be like a fist, ready to strike. He could feel, touch
the disappointment of his subordinates, whom he was infecting with his own uncertainty instead of infusing them with
confidence. This was not what they were hoping for. To hide
his confusion, he communicated with the garrisons in the inte_ rior. He repeated to General César A. Oliva, in Santiago, General Garcia Urbdez, in Dajabén, and General Guarionex
Estrella, in La Vega, in the same hesitant way—his tongue
barely obeyed him, as if he were drunk—that due to the presumed assassination, they should confine their troops to barracks and take no action without his authorization.

After the round of phone calls, he broke out of the secret
straitjacket that bound him and took a step in the right direction:

“Don’t leave,” he announced, getting to his feet. “I’m calling an immediate high-level meeting.”

He ordered calls placed to the President of the Republic,
the head of the SIM, and the former President, General Héctor

373
Bienvenido Trujillo. He would have the three of them come
here, and arrest them. If Balaguer was part of the conspiracy,
he could help in the steps that followed. He saw bewilderment
in the officers, glances exchanged, whispering. They passed
him the telephone. They had gotten Dr. Joaquin Balaguer out
of bed:

“I’m sorry to wake you, Mr. President. There has been
an attempt on His Excellency, while he was driving to San
Cristébal. As Minister of the Armed Forces, I am calling an
urgent meeting at the December 18 Fortress. I ask you to
come here without delay.”

President Balaguer did not respond for a long time, so
long that Roman thought they had been cut off. Was it surprise that caused his silence? Satisfaction at knowing the Plan
was being put into effect? Or mistrust of this phone call in the |
middle of the night? At last he heard his answer, spoken without a trace of emotion:

“If something so serious has occurred, as President of the
Republic my place is not in a barracks but at the National
Palace. I am going there now. I suggest that the meeting be
held in my office. Goodbye.”

Without giving him time to reply, he hung up.

Johnny Abbes Garcia listened to him attentively. All right,
he would go to the meeting, but only after he heard the statement of Captain Zacarias de la Cruz, who was badly wounded
and had just been admitted to Hospital Marién. Only Blacky
Trujillo appeared to agree to his call for a meeting. “Pll be nght
there.” He seemed unhinged by what was happening. But when
he didn’t show up after half an hour, General José René Roman
knew that his last-minute plan had no chance of being realized.
Not one of the three men would fall into the trap. And he, because of his actions, had begun to sink into quicksands that it
would soon be too late to escape. Unless he commandeered a
military plane and had it fly to Haiti, Trinidad, Puerto Rico, the
French Antilles, or Venezuela, where he would be welcomed
with open arms.

374.
From that moment on, he was in a somnambulistic state.
Time was eclipsed, or, rather, instead of moving forward it
spun around in a monomaniacal repetition that depressed and
infuriated him. He would not leave that state again in the four
and a half months of life he had remaining, if what he had, deserved to be called life and not hell, a nightmare. Until October
12, 1961, he did not have a clear notion of chronology but did
have an idea of mysterious eternity, which had never interested
him. In the sudden attacks of lucidity that reminded him he
was alive, that it hadn’t ended, he tortured himself with the
same question: why, knowing that tis was waiting for you,
why didn’t you act as you should have? The question hurt him
more than the tortures he faced with great courage, perhaps to
prove to himself that cowardice was not the reason he had
acted so indecisively on that endless night of May 31, 1961.

Incapable of making sense of his actions, he fell into contradictions and erratic initiatives. He ordered his brother-in-law,
General Virgilio Garcia Trujillo, to dispatch four tanks and
three infantry companies from San Isidro, where the armored
divisions were stationed, to reinforce the December 18
Fortress. But immediately after that he decided to leave the
Fortress and go to the Palace. He instructed the head of the
Army General Staff, the young General Tuntin Sanchez, to
keep him informed regarding the search. Before he left he called
Ameérico Dante Minervino, at La Victoria. He categorically ordered him to immediately liquidate, with absolute secrecy, the
prisoners Major Segundo Imbert Barreras and Rafael Augusto
Sanchez Saulley, and to make the bodies disappear, for he
feared that Antonio Imbert, a member of the action group,
might have told his brother about his involvement in the conspiracy. Américo Dante Minervino, accustomed to these kinds
of missions, asked no questions: “Understood, General.” He bewildered General Tuntin Sdnchez by telling him to inform the
SIM, Army, and Air Force patrols participating in the search
that persons on the lists of “enemies” and “the disaffected,”
which had been distributed to them, ought to be terminated at

375
the first sign of resisting arrest. (“We don’t want prisoners
who'll be used to unleash international campaigns against our
country.”) His subordinate made no comment. He would
transmit your instructions exactly, General.

As he left the Fortress to go to the Palace, the lieutenant of
the guard informed him that two civilians in a car, one of
whom claimed to be his brother Ramén (Bibin), had come to
the entrance demanding to see him. Following his orders, he
had obliged them to leave. He nodded, not saying a word.
That meant his brother was in on the plot, that Bibin too
would have to pay for his doubts and evasions. Sunk in a kind
of hypnosis, he thought his inaction could be due to the fact
that although the body of the Chief might be dead, his soul,
spirit, whatever you called it, still enslaved him.

At the National Palace he found confusion and desolation.
Almost the entire Trujillo family had gathered there. Petdn, in
riding boots and with a submachine gun slung over his shoulder, had just arrived from his fiefdom in Bonao and was pacing
back and forth like a cartoon cowboy. Héctor (Blacky), sitting
on a sofa, rubbed his arms as if he were cold. Mireya, and his
mother-in-law Marina, were consoling Dofia Marfa, the
Chief’s wife, who was as pale as a corpse and whose eyes
flashed fire. The beautiful Angelita cried and wrung her hands,
but her husband, Colonel José (Pechito) Leén Estévez, in uniform and looking glum, failed to calm her. He felt all their eyes
fixed on him: any news? He embraced them, one by one: they
were combing the city, house by house, street by street, and
soon .. . Then he discovered that they knew more than the
head of the Armed Forces. One of the conspirators, the former
soldier Pedro Livio Cedefio, had been wounded and was being
interrogated by Abbes Garcia at the International Clinic. And
Colonel José Leén Estévez had already informed Ramfis and
Radhamés, who were trying to charter an Air France plane to
fly them in from Paris. This was when he also learned that the
power attached to his position, which he had squandered over
the past few hours, was beginning to slip away; decisions no

376
longer came from his office but from the heads of the SIM,
Johnny Abbes Garcia and Colonel Figueroa Carrion, or from
Truyillo’s family and relatives, like Pechito or his brother-in-law
Virgilio. An invisible force was distancing him from power. It
did not surprise him that Blacky Trujillo gave him no explanation for not coming to the meeting he had asked him to attend.

He left the group, hurried to a phone booth, and called the
Fortress. He ordered the head of the General Staff to send
troops to surround the International Clinic, place the former
officer Pedro Livio Cedefio under guard, and stop the SIM
from taking him out of there, using force if necessary. The prisoner had to be transferred to the December 18 Fortress. He
would come and interrogate him personally. Tuntin Sanchez,
after an ominous pause, said only: “Good night, General.” He
told himself, in torment, that this was perhaps his worst mistake of the entire evening.

There were more people now in the reception room where
the Truyillos had gathered. All of them listened, in griefstricken silence, to Colonel Johnny Abbes Garcia, who was
standing and speaking mournfully:

“The dental plate found on the highway belongs to His
Excellency. Dr. Fernando Camino has confirmed this. We
must assume that if he isn’t dead, his condition is grave.”
| “What about the assassins?” Roman interrupted, in a defi
ant attitude. “Did the subject talk? Did he name his accomplices?”

The fat-cheeked face of the head of the SIM turned toward
him. His amphibian eyes washed over him with a gaze that, in
his state of extreme susceptibility, seemed mocking.

“He’s given up three,” Johnny Abbes said, looking at him
without blinking. “Antonio Imbert, Luis Amiama, and General Juan Tomas Diaz. He’s the leader, he says.”

“Have they been captured?”

“My people are looking for them all over Ciudad Trujillo,”
Johnny Abbes Garcia declared. “There’s something else. The
United States might be behind this.”

377
He mumbled a few words of congratulation to Colonel
Abbes and returned to the phone booth. He called General
Tuntin Sdnchez again. The patrols should immediately arrest
General Juan Tomds Diaz, Luis Amiama, and Antonio Imbert,
as well as their families, “alive or dead, it didn’t matter, maybe
dead would be better because the CIA might try to get them
out of the country.” When he hung up, he was certain: the way
things were going, not even exile would be possible. He’d have
to shoot himself.

In the salon, Abbes Garcfa was still speaking. Not about
the assassins; about the situation faced by the country.

“Ata time like this, it is absolutely necessary that a member
of the Trujillo family assume the Presidency of the Republic,”
he declared. “Dr. Balaguer should resign and hand over his office to General Héctor Bienvenido or General José Arismendi.
This will let the people know that the Chief’s spirit, philosophy, and policies will not be undermined and will continue to
guide Dominican life.”

There was an uncomfortable silence. Those present exchanged glances. The vulgar, bullying voice of Petan Trujillo
dominated the room:

“Johnny’s right. Balaguer should resign. Blacky or I will
take over the Presidency. The people will know that Trujillo
hasn’t died.”

Then, following the eyes of everyone in the room, General
Roman discovered that the puppet president, as small and discreet as ever, was listening from a chair in the corner, trying,
one would say, not to be in the way. He was dressed impeccably, as usual, and displayed absolute serenity, as if this were no
more than a minor formality. He gave a fleeting little smile and
spoke with a tranquillity that softened the atmosphere:

“As you all know, I am President of the Republic by a decision of the Generalissimo, who always accommodated himself to constitutional procedures. I occupy this post in order to
facilitate matters, not to complicate them. If my resignation
will alleviate the situation, you have it. But allow me to make a

378
suggestion. Before reaching a transcendental decision that signifies a break with legality, would it not be prudent to wait for
the arrival of General Ramfis Trujillo? As the Chief’s oldest
son, his spiritual, military, and political heir, should he not be
consulted?”

He looked at the woman who, according to the requirements of strict Truyillista protocol, was always called the Bountiful First Lady by social chroniclers. An imperious Maria
Martinez de Trujillo reacted: |

“Dr. Balaguer is nght. Until Ramfis arrives, nothing
should change.” Her round face had regained its color.

Watching the President of the Republic shyly lower his
eyes, General Roman escaped for a few seconds from his gelatinous mental wandering to tell himself that, unlike him, this
unarmed little man, who wrote poetry and seemed so inconse_ quential in a world of machos with pistols and submachine
guns, knew exactly what he wanted and what he was doing,
- and did not lose his composure for an instant. In the course of
that night, the longest in his half century of life, General
Roman discovered that in the vacuum and chaos created by
what had happened to the Chief, this insignificant man whom
everyone had always considered a mere clerk, a purely decorative figure in the regime, began to acquire surprising authority.

As if in a dream, in the hours that followed he saw this assemblage of Trujillo’s family, relatives, and top leaders form
cliques, dissolve them, and form them again as events began to
connect like pieces filling in the gaps of a puzzle until a solid
figure took shape. Before midnight they were told that the pistol discovered at the site of the attack belonged to General
Juan Tomas Diaz. When Roman ordered his house searched,
along with the houses of all his brothers and sisters, he was informed that it was already being taken care of by patrols of the
SIM under the direction of Colonel Figueroa Carrion, and that
Juan Tomas’s brother, Modesto Diaz, turned over to the SIM
by his friend the gamecock breeder Chucho Malapunta, in
whose house he had been hiding, was already in a cell at La

379
Cuarenta. Fifteen minutes later, Pupo telephoned his son
Alvaro. He asked him to bring extra ammunition for his M-1
carbine (he had not removed it from his shoulder), for he was
convinced that at any moment he would have to defend his life
or end it by his own hand. After conferring in his office with
Abbes Garcia and Colonel Luis José (Pechito) Leon Estévez
regarding Bishop Reilly, he took the initiative of saying that on
his authority he should be removed by force from the Santo.
Domingo Academy, and he supported the proposal of the head
of the SIM that the bishop should be executed, for there was
no doubt about the Church’s complicity in the criminal plot.
Angelita Trujillo’s husband, touching his revolver, said it
would be an honor to carry out the order. He returned in less
than an hour, enraged. The operation had gone off without serious incident, except for a few punches aimed at some nuns and
two Redemptorist priests, also gringos, who tried to protect
the bishop. The only fatality was a German shepherd, the
watchdog at the Academy, who bit a cali¢ before being shot.
The prelate was now in the Air Force detention center at kilometer nine on the San Isidro highway. Commander Rodriguez
Méndez, head of the center, refused to execute Reilly and prevented Pechito Ledn Estévez from doing so, claiming he had
orders from the President of the Republic.

Stupefied, Roman asked if he was referring to Balaguer.
Angelita Trujillo’s husband, no less disconcerted, nodded:

“Apparently, he seems to think he exists. What’s so incredible isn’t that the insolent little jerk is sticking his nose into our
business, but that his orders are being obeyed. Ramfis has to
put him in his place.”

Pupo Romén exploded in anger: “We don’t have to wait
for Ramfis. Pll straighten him out right now.”

He strode toward the President’s office but had a dizzy
spell in the corridor. He managed to stagger to a chair, where
he collapsed and fell asleep immediately. When he awoke a
couple of hours later, he remembered a polar nightmare: trembling with cold on a snowy steppe, he watched a pack of

380
wolves loping toward him. He jumped up and almost ran to
President Balaguer’s office. He found the doors wide open. He
walked in, determined to make this meddling pygmy feel the
weight of his authority, but, another surprise, in the office he
came face to face with none other than Bishop Reilly. His eyes
wide with fear, his tunic torn, his face bearing the marks of
abuse, the bishop’s tall figure still maintained a majestic dignity. The President of the Republic was saying goodbye to
him.

“Ah, Monsignor, look who is here, the Minister of the
Armed Forces, General José René Roman Fernandez.” He introduced them. “He has come to reiterate to you the regrets of
the military authorities for this lamentable misunderstanding.
You have my word, and that of the head of the Army—is that
not so, General Roman?—that neither you, nor any prelate,
nor the sisters of Santo Domingo, will be troubled again. I will
personally give my apologies to Sister Wilhelmina and Sister
Helen Claire. We are living through very difficult times, and
you, as a man of experience, can understand that. There are
subordinates who lose control and go too far, as they did
tonight. It will not happen again. If you have the slightest
problem, I beg you to get in touch with me personally.”

Bishop Reilly, who looked at them as if he were surrounded by Martians, nodded vaguely and took his leave.
Roman confronted Dr. Balaguer angrily, touching his submachine gun:

“You owe me an explanation, Mr. Balaguer. Who are you
to countermand an order of mine, calling a military center, a
subordinate officer, passing over the chain of command? Who
the hell do you think you are?”

The little man looked at him as if he were listening to the
rain. After observing him for a moment, he smiled amiably.
And indicating the chair in front of the desk, invited him to sit
down. Pupo Roman did not move. The blood was boiling in
his veins, like a volcano about to erupt.

“Answer my question, damn it!” he shouted.

381
Dr. Balaguer did not falter this time either. With the same
mildness he used when reciting or giving a speech, he counseled him paternally:

“You are confused, General, and with reason. But make an
effort. We may be living through the most critical moment in
the history of the Republic, and you more than anyone should
set an example of calm for the country.”

He withstood the general’s enraged look—Pupo wanted to
hit him, and, at the same time, curiosity restrained him—and after he sat down at his desk, he added, using the same intonation:

“You should thank me for having stopped you from committing a serious error, General. Killing a bishop would not
have resolved your problems. It would have made them worse.
For what it is worth, you should know that the President you
~ came here to insult is prepared to help you. Although, I fear, I
will not be able to do much for you.”

Romén detected no irony in his words. Did they hide a
threat? No, judging by the benevolent manner in which Balaguer looked at him. His fury evaporated. Now, he was afraid.
He envied the serenity of this honey-voiced midget.

“You should know that I’ve ordered the execution of
Segundo Imbert and Papito Sanchez, in La Victoria,” he
roared at the top of his voice, not thinking about what he was
saying. “They were in this conspiracy too. Pll do the same to
everybody who’s implicated in the assassination of the Chief.”

Dr. Balaguer nodded gently, his expression not changing
in the slightest.

“For great ills, great remedies,” he murmured cryptically.
And, standing up, he walked to the door of his office and went
out without saying goodbye.

Romdén remained there, not knowing inst to do. He
chose to go to his own office. At two-thirty in the morning he
drove Mireya, who had taken a tranquilizer, to the house in
Gazcue. There he found his brother Bibin forcing the soldiers
on guard to drink from a bottle of Carta Dorada that he brandished like a flag. Bibin, the idler, the drinker, the rake, the

382
wastrel, good-natured Bibin could barely stand. He practically
had to carry him to the upstairs bathroom on the pretext that
he would help him vomit and wash his face. As soon as they
were alone, Bibin burst into tears. He contemplated his
brother with infinite sadness in his tear-filled eyes. A thread of
spittle hung from his lips like a spiderweb. Lowering his voice,
choking up, he said that he, Luis Amiama, and Juan Tomas
had spent the night looking for him all over the city and became so desperate they even cursed him. What happened,
Pupo? Why didn’t he do anything? Why did he hide? Wasn’t
there a Plan? The action group did their part. They brought
him the body as he had asked.

“Why didn’t you do your part, Pupo?” Sighs shook his
chest. “What’s going to happen to us now?”

“There was a problem, Bibin. Razor Espaillat showed up,
he saw everything. There was nothing I could do. Now. . .”

“Now we're fucked,” Bibin said hoarsely, swallowing mucus. “Luis Amiama, Juan Tomas, Antonio de la Maza, Tony
Imbert, all of us. But especially you. You, and then me, because I’m your brother. If you love me at all, shoot me right
now, Pupo. Fire that submachine gun, make the most of my
being drunk. Before they do it. For the sake of what you love
best, Pupo.”

At that moment, Alvaro knocked at the bathroom door:
they had just discovered the Generalissimo’s body in the trunk
of a car at the house of General Juan Tomas Diaz.

He did not close his eyes that night, or the next one, or the
one after that, and, probably, in four and a half months did not
experience again what sleep had once been for him—resting,
forgetting about himself and others, dissolving into a nonexistence from which he returned restored, his energy renewed—
although he did lose consciousness often, and spent long
hours, days, nights in a mindless stupor without images or
ideas, with a firm desire for death to come and free him. Everything mixed up and scrambled, as if time had turned into a
stew, a jumble in which before, now, and afterward had no

383
logical sequence but were recurrent. He clearly remembered
the sight, when he reached the National Palace, of Dofia Maria
Martinez de Trujillo bellowing before the corpse of the Chief:
“Let the blood of his assassins run until the last drop!” And, as
if it came next, but it could have happened only a day later, the
svelte, uniformed, impeccable figure of Ramfis, pale and rigid,
leaning without bending over the carved coffin, contemplating
the painted face of the Chief, and murmuring: “I won’t be as
generous as you were with our enemies, Papa.” It seemed to
him that Ramfis was talking not to his father but to him. He
gave him a hard embrace and groaned in his ear: “What an
irreparable loss, Ramfis. Its good we have you.”

He saw himself immediately after that, in his parade uniform, the inseparable M-1 submachine gun in his hand, in the .
crowded church in San Cristdbal, attending the funeral rites for
the Chief. Some lines from the address by a much larger President Balaguer—“Here, ladies and gentlemen, split by a flash of
treacherous lightning, lies the powerful oak that for more than
thirty years defied all thunderbolts and emerged victorious from
every storm”—brought tears to his eyes. He listened, sitting
next to a stony Ramfis, who was surrounded by bodyguards
carrying submachine guns. And he saw himself, at the same
time, contemplating (one, two, three days earlier?) the line of
countless thousands of Dominicans of all ages, professions,
races, and social classes, waiting hours on end, under a merciless sun, to climb the stairs of the Palace and, with hysterical
exclamations of grief, with fainting and screaming and offerings to the Joas of Voodoo, to pay their final homage to the
Chief, the Man, the Benefactor, the Generalissimo, the Father.
And in the midst of all that, he was listening to reports from
his aides regarding the capture of the engineer Hudscar Tejeda
and Salvador Estrella Sadhald, the end of Antonio de la Maza
and General Juan Tomas Diaz in Independencia Park at the
corner of Bolivar as they defended themselves with guns, and
the almost simultaneous death, a short distance away, of Lieutenant Amador Garcia, who also killed before he could be

384
killed, and the mob’s looting and destruction of the house
where his aunt had given him refuge. And he remembered the
rumors regarding the mysterious disappearance of his compadre Amiama Tid and Antonio Imbert— Ramfis was offering
half a million pesos to anyone with information leading to
their capture—and the fall of some two hundred Dominicans,
both civilian and military, in Ciudad Trujillo, Santiago, La
Vega, San Pedro de Macoris, and half a dozen other places,
who had been implicated in the assassination of Trujillo.

All of that was mixed up, but at least it was intelligible. As
was the final coherent memory his mind would preserve: how,
when the Mass for the Generalissimo lying in state in the San
Cristobal church was over, Petan Trujillo took his arm: “Come
with me in my car, Pupo.” In Petan’s Cadillac he knew— it was
the last thing he knew with total certainty—that this was his
last chance to save himself from what was coming by emptying
his submachine gun into the Chief?’s brother and into himself,
because that ride was not going to end at his house in Gazcue.
It ended at San Isidro Air Base, where, Petdn lied to him, not
bothering to pretend, “there would be a family meeting.” At
the entrance to the base, two generals, his brother-in-law Virgilio Garcia Trujillo and the head of the Army General Staff,
Tuntin Sd4nchez, informed him that he was under arrest, accused of complicity with the assassins of the Benefactor and
Father of the New Nation. Very pale, avoiding his eyes, they
asked for his weapon. Obediently, he handed them the M-1
submachine gun that had not left his side for four days.

They took him to a room with a table, an old typewriter, a
pile of blank sheets, and a chair. They asked him to remove his
belt and shoes and hand them to a sergeant. He did so, asking
no questions. They left him alone, and minutes later Ramfis’s
two closest friends, Colonel Luis José (Pechito) Leén Estévez
and Pirulo Sanchez Rubirosa, came in, did not greet him, and
told him to write down everything he knew about the conspiracy, giving the full names of the conspirators. General Ramfis—
by supreme decree, which the Congress would confirm

385
tonight, President Balaguer had just named him Commanderin-Chief of the Air, Sea, and Land Forces of the Republic—had
full knowledge of the plot, thanks to the detainees, all of whom
had denounced him.

He sat down at the typewriter and for several hours did
what they had ordered. He was a terrible typist; he used only
two fingers and made a good number of mistakes that he did
not take the time to correct. He told everything, beginning
with his first conversation with his compadre Luts Amiama six
months earlier, and he named the twenty or so people he knew
were implicated, but not Bibin. He explained that for him the
decisive factor was the support of the United States for the
conspiracy, and that he agreed to preside over the civilianmilitary junta only when he learned from Juan Tomés that
both Consul Henry Dearborn and Consul Jack Bennett, as well
as the head of the CIA in Ciudad Trujillo, Lorenzo D. Berry
(Wimpy), wanted him to head it. He told only one small lie:
that in exchange for his participation, he had demanded that
Generalissimo Trujillo be abducted and forced to resign, but
under no circumstances was he to be killed. The other conspirators had betrayed him by not keeping this promise. He reread
the pages and signed them.

He was alone for a long time, waiting, with a serenity of
spirit he had not felt since the night of May 30. When they
came for him, it was growing dark. It was a group of officers
he did not know. They put him in handcuffs and took him out,
not wearing his shoes, to the courtyard of the base, and put
him in a van with tinted windows; on it he read the words
“Pan-American Institute of Education.” He thought they were
taking him to La Cuarenta. He knew that gloomy house on
Calle 40, near the Dominican Cement Factory, very well. It
had belonged to General Juan Tomas Dfaz, who sold it to the
State so that Johnny Abbes could convert it into the setting for
his elaborate methods of extracting confessions from prisoners.
He had even been present, following the Castroite invasion on
June 14, when one of those being interrogated, Dr. Tejeda

386
Florentino, sitting on the grotesque Throne—a seat from a
jeep, pipes, electric prods, bullwhips, a garrote with wooden
ends for strangling the prisoner as he received electric shocks—
was mistakenly electrocuted by a SIM technician, who released
the maximum voltage. But no, instead of La Cuarenta they
took him to El Nueve on the Mella Highway, a former residence of Pirulo Sanchez Rubirosa. It also housed a Throne,
one that was smaller but more modern.

He was not afraid. Not now. The immense fear that since
the night of Truyillo’s assassination had kept him “mounted” —
the term used for those who were drained of themselves and
occupied by spirits in Voodoo ceremonies—had disappeared
completely. In El Nueve, they stripped him and sat him on the
black seat in the middle of a windowless, dimly lit room. The
strong smell of excrement and urine nauseated him. The seat,
misshapen and absurd with all its appendages, was bolted to
the floor and had straps and rings for the ankles, wrists, chest,
and head. Its arms were faced with copper sheets to facilitate
the passage of the current. A bundle of wires came out of the
Throne and led to a desk or counter, where the voltage was
controlled. In the sickly light, as he was strapped into the chair,
he recognized the bloodless face of Ramfis between Pechito
Leon Estévez and Sanchez Rubirosa. He had shaved his mustache and was not wearing his eternal Ray-Ban sunglasses. He
looked at Pupo with the lost gaze he had seen in Ramfis when
he directed the torture and killing of the survivors of Constanza, Maimon, and Estero Hondo in June 1959. Ramfis
continued to look at him without saying anything, while a calié
shaved him, and another, kneeling, bound his ankles, and a
third sprayed perfume around the room. General Romén Fernandez withstood those eyes.

“You're the worst of all, Pupo,” he heard Ramfis say suddenly, his voice breaking with sorrow. “Everything you are and
everything you have you owe to Papa. Why did you do it?”

“For love of my country,” he heard himself saying.

There was a pause. Ramfis spoke again:

387
“Ts Balaguer involved?”

“I don’t know. Luis Amiama told me they had sounded
him out, through his doctor. He didn’t seem very sure. I tend
to think he wasn’t.”

Ramfis moved his head and Pupo felt himself thrown forward with the force of a cyclone. The jolt seemed to pound all his
nerves, from his head to his feet. Straps and rings cut into his
muscles, he saw balls of fire, sharp needles jabbed into his pores.
He endured it without screaming, he only bellowed. Although
with each discharge—they came one after the other, with intervals when they threw buckets of water at him to revive him—he
passed out and could not see, he then returned to consciousness.
And his nostrils filled with that perfume housemaids wore. He
tried to maintain a certain composure, not humiliate himself by
begging for mercy. In the nightmare he would never come out
of, he was sure of two things: Johnny Abbes Garcia never appeared among his torturers, and at one point somebody—it
might have been Pechito Leén Estévez or General Tuntin
S4nchez—let him know that Bibin’s reflexes were better than his
because he had managed to fire a bullet into his mouth when the
SIM came for him at his house on Arzobispo Nouel, corner of
José Reyes. Pupo often wondered if his children, Alvaro and José René, whom he had never told about the conspiracy, had managed to kill themselves.

Between sessions in the electric chair, they dragged him,
naked, to a damp cell, where buckets of pestilential water made
him respond. To keep him from sleeping they taped his lids to his
eyebrows with adhesive tape. When, in spite of having his eyes
open, he fell into semiconsciousness, they woke him by beating
him with baseball bats. At various times they stuffed inedible
substances into his mouth; at times he detected excrement,
and vomited. Then, in a rapid descent into subhumanity, he
could keep down what they gave him. In the early sessions with
electricity, Ramfis interrogated him. He repeated the same
question over and over again, to see if he would contradict
himself. (“Is President Balaguer implicated?”) He responded,

388
making superhuman efforts to have his tongue obey him. Until he heard laughter, and then the colorless, rather feminine
voice of Ramfis: “Shut up, Pupo. You have nothing to tell me.
I know everything. Now you’re only paying for your betrayal
of Papa.” It was the same voice, with its discordant changes in
pitch, that Ramfis had at the orgy of blood following June 14,
when he lost his mind and the Chief had to send him to a psychiatric hospital in Belgium.

At the time of this last conversation with Ramfis, he could
no longer see him. They had removed the tape, ripping off his
eyebrows in the process, and a drunken, joyful voice announced: “Now you'll have some dark, so you'll sleep real
good.” He felt the needle piercing his eyelids. He did not move
while they sewed them shut. It surprised him that sealing his
eyes with thread caused him less suffering than the shocks on
the Throne. By then, he had failed in his two attempts to kill
himself. The first time, he banged his head with all the strength
he had left against the wall in his cell. He passed out, and barely
bloodied his hair. The second time, he almost succeeded.
Climbing up the bars—they had removed his handcuffs in
preparation for another session on the Throne—he broke the
bulb that lit the cell. On all fours, he swallowed every bit of
glass, hoping that an internal hemorrhage would end his life.
But the SIM had two doctors on permanent call and a small
first-aid station supplied with what was necessary to prevent
tortured prisoners from dying by their own hand. They took
him to the infirmary, made him swallow a liquid that induced
vomiting, and flushed out his intestines. They saved him, so
that Ramfis and his friends could go on killing him in stages.

When they castrated him, the end was near. They did not
cut off his testicles with a knife but used a scissors, while he
was on the Throne. He heard excited snickers and obscene remarks from individuals who were only voices and sharp odors
of armpits and cheap tobacco. He did not give them the satisfaction of screaming. They stuffed his testicles into his mouth,
and he swallowed them, hoping with all his might that this

389
would hasten his death, something he never dreamed he could
desire so much.

At one point he recognized the voice of Modesto Diaz, the
brother of General Juan Tomds Diaz, who, people said, was as
intelligent as Egghead Cabral or the Constitutional Sot. Had
they put him in the same cell? Were they torturing him too?
Modesto’s voice was bitter and accusatory:

“We’re here because of you, Pupo. Why did you betray us?
Didn’t you know this would happen to you? Repent for having
betrayed your friends and your country.”

He did not have the strength to articulate a sound or even
open his mouth. Some time later—it could have been hours,
days, or weeks—he heard a conversation between a SIM doctor and Ramfis Trujillo:

“Impossible to keep him alive any longer, General.”

“How much time does he have?” It was Ramfis, no doubt
about it.

“A few hours, perhaps a day if I double the serum. But in
his condition, he won’t survive another shock. It’s incredible
that he’s lasted four months, General.”

“Move away, then. I won’t let him die a natural death.
Stand behind me, you don’t want any cartridges to hit you.”

With great joy, General José René Roman felt the final
burst of gunfire.

390
