# When Dr. Marcelino Vélez Santana, who had
| gone out for news, came back to the airless attic

femes §=6 oof Dr. Robert Reid Cabral’s little Moorish-style
house, svhione they had already spent two days, to place a sympathetic hand on Turk’s shoulder and tell him that the calzés
had stormed his house on Mahatma Gandhi and taken away
his wife and children, Salvador Estrella Sadhald decided to turn
himself in. He was sweating, gasping for breath. What else
could he do? Let those savages kill his wife and children? They
were certainly being tortured. He felt too much anguish to
pray for his family. That was when he told his companions in
the hideout what he was going to do.

“You know what that means, Turk,” Antonio de la Maza
argued with him. “They'll abuse and torture you in the most
barbaric way before they kill you.”

“And theyll go on hurting your family in front of you, to
make you betray everybody,” insisted General Juan Tomas
Diaz.

“Nobody will make me open my mouth, even if they burn
me alive,” he swore with tears in his eyes. “The only one [ll
name is that stinking Pupo Roman.”

They asked him not to leave the hiding place before they
did, and Salvador agreed to stay one more night. The thought
of his wife and children—fourteen-year-old Luis and Carmen
Elly, who had just turned four—in the dungeons of the SIM,
surrounded by sadistic thugs, kept him awake all night, gasping for breath, not praying, not thinking about anything else.
Remorse gnawed at his heart: how could he have exposed his
family like this? And the guilt he felt for shooting Pedro Livio
Cedefio moved to the middle distance. Poor Pedro Livio!

391

 
Where was he now? What horrors had been done to him?

On the afternoon of June 4, he was the first to leave Reid
Cabral’s house. He hailed a cab at the corner and gave the address, on Calle Santiago, of the engineer Feliciano Sosa Mieses,
his wife’s cousin, with whom he had always been good friends.
All he wanted was to find out if he had any news of her and the
children, and the rest of the family, but that was impossible.
Feliciano himself opened the door, and when he saw him, he |
made a gesture—Vade retro!—as if the devil were standing in
front of him.

“What are you doing here, Turk?” he exclaimed, furious.
“Don’t you know I have a family? Do you want them to kill
us? Get away! For the sake of everything you hold dear, get
out of here!”

He closed the door with an expression of fear and revul- |
sion that left Salvador not knowing what to do. He went back
to the cab, feeling a depression that turned his bones to water.
Despite the heat, he was dying of cold.

“You've recognized me, haven’t you?” he asked the driver,
when he was already in his seat.

The man, who wore a baseball cap pulled down to his eyebrows, did not turn around to look at him.

“I recognized you when you got in,” he said very calmly.
“Don’t worry, you’re safe with me. I'm anti-Trujillista too. If
we have to run, we'll run together. Where do you want to go?”

“To a church,” said Salvador. “It doesn’t matter which
one.”

He would put himself in the hands of God and, if possible,
make confession. After he had unburdened his conscience, he
would ask the priest to call the guards. But after driving toward the center of town for a short time, along streets where
the shadows were deepening, the driver warned him:

“That guy turned you in, sefior. There are the caliés.”

“Stop,” Salvador ordered. “Before they kill you too.”

He crossed himself and got out of the cab, holding up his
hands to indicate to the men with submachine guns and pistols

392
in the Volkswagens that he would offer no resistance. They put
him in’ handcuffs that bit into his wrists and pushed him into
the back seat of one of the Beetles; the two caliés who were half
sitting on him gave off a stink of sweat and feet. The car pulled
away. Since they were on the road to San Pedro de Macoris, he
assumed they were taking him to El Nueve. He made the trip
in silence, trying to pray, saddened because he could not. His
head was a seething, noisy, chaotic place where nothing was
still, not a thought, not an image: everything was popping, like
soap bubbles.

There was the famous house, at kilometer nine, encircled
by a high concrete wall. They crossed a garden and he saw a
comfortable country estate, with an old chalet surrounded by
trees and flanked by rustic buildings. They shoved him out of
the Beetle. He walked down a darkened hall lined with cells
that held clusters of naked men, and they made him go down a
long staircase. An acrid, sharp odor of excrement, vomit, and
burned flesh made him feel faint. He thought of hell. There
was hardly any light at the bottom of the stairs, but in the semidarkness he could see a line of cells with iron doors and little
barred windows, crowded with heads struggling to see out. At
the end of the cellar they tore off his trousers, shirt, underwear,
shoes, and socks. He was naked, and still wearing handcuffs.
The soles of his feet felt wet with a sticky substance that covered the rough flagstone floor. They kept shoving him and
forced him into another room that was almost completely
dark. They sat him down and fastened him into a shapeless |
chair lined with metal plates—he shuddered—that had straps
and metal rings for his hands and feet.

For a long time nothing happened. He tried to pray. One
of the men in shorts who had tied him down—his eyes were
becoming used to the darkness—began to spray the air, and he
recognized the cheap perfume called Nice that was advertised
on the radio. He felt the cold of the metal plates against his
thighs, buttocks, back, and at the same time he was sweating,
almost suffocating in the sultry atmosphere. By now he could

393
make out the faces of the people crowded around him; their
silhouettes, their odors, some facial features. He recognized
the flabby face with the double chin, the deformed body with
its prominent belly. He was sitting very close to him, on a
bench between two other people.

“Its shameful, damn it! A son of General Piro Estrella involved in this shit,” said Johnny Abbes. “There’s no gratitude
in your fucking blood.”

He was about to say that his family had nothing to do with
what he had done, that his father, his brothers, his wife, certainly not Luisito and little Carmen Elly, none of them knew
anything about this, when the electrical current picked him up
and flattened him against the straps and rings that held him
down. He felt needles in his pores, his head exploded into little
fireballs, and he pissed, shat, and vomited everything he had
inside. A bucket of water revived him. He immediately recognized the other figure to the nght of Abbes Garcia: Ramfis
Trujillo. He wanted to insult him and at the same time plead
with him to release his wife and Luisito and Carmen, but his
throat produced no sound.

“Ts it true that Pupo Roman is part of the plot?” asked
Ramfis’s discordant voice.

_ Another bucket of water returned his powers of speech.

“Yes, yes,” he said, not recognizing his own voice. “That
coward, that traitor, yes. He lied to us. Kill me, General Trujillo, but let my wife and children go. They're innocent.”

“It won’t be that easy, asshole,” Ramfis replied. “Before
you go to hell, you have to pass through purgatory. You son of
a bitch!”

A second electrical discharge catapulted him against his
bonds—he felt his eyes popping out of their sockets, like a
frog’s —and he lost consciousness. When he came to, he was on
the floor of a cell, naked and handcuffed, in the middle of a
slimy puddle. His bones and muscles ached, and he felt an unbearable burning in his testicles and anus, as if they had been
flayed. But the thirst was even more agonizing: his throat,

394
tongue, and palate were like fiery sandpaper. He closed his eyes.
and prayed. He could, with intervals when his mind went
blank; then, for a few seconds, he was able to concentrate again
on the words. He prayed to Our Lady of Mercy, reminding
her of the devotion with which he had made the pilgrimage, as
a young man, to Jarabacoa, and climbed to Santo Cerro to
kneel at her feet in the Sanctuary devoted to her memory.
Humbly he implored her to protect his wife, and Luisito, and
Carmen Elly from the cruelty of the Beast. In the midst of the
horror, he felt grateful. He could pray again.

When he opened his eyes, he recognized his brother Guarionex lying beside him, his body naked and battered, covered
with wounds and bruises. My God, they had left poor Guaro
in a terrible state! The general’s eyes were open, looking at him
in the dim light that a bulb in the hallway allowed to filter
through the little barred window. Did he recognize him?

“Pm Turk, your brother, Pm Salvador,” he said, dragging
himself over to him. “Can you hear me? Can you see me,
Guaro?”

He spent an infinite time trying to communicate with his
_ brother but did not succeed. Guaro was alive; he moved,
moaned, opened and closed his eyes. At times he made bizarre
remarks and gave orders to his subordinates: “Move that mule,
Sergeant!” And they had kept the Plan secret from General
Guarionex Estrella Sadhal4 because they considered him too
much of a Trujillista. What a surprise for poor Guaro: to be arrested, tortured, and interrogated because of something he
knew nothing about. He tried to explain this to Ramfis and
Johnny Abbes the next time he was taken to the torture chamber and seated on the Throne, and he repeated it and swore it
over and over again, between fainting spells brought on by the
electrical currents, and while they flogged him with those
whips, the “bull’s balls,” that tore off pieces of skin. They did
not seem interested in knowing the truth. He swore in God’s
name that Guarionex, his other brothers, certainly not his father, none of them had been part of the conspiracy, and he

395
shouted that what they had done to General Estrella Sadhala
was a monstrous injustice that they would have to answer for
in the next life. They did not listen, they were more interested
in torturing him than in interrogating him. Only after an interminable period of time—had hours, days, weeks passed since
his capture? —did he realize that with a certain regularity they
were giving him a bowl of soup with pieces of yuca, a slice of
bread, and jugs of water into which the jailers spat as they
passed them to him. By now nothing mattered. He could pray.
He prayed in all his free and lucid moments, and sometimes |
even when he was asleep or unconscious. But not when they
were torturing him. On the Throne, pain and fear paralyzed
him. From time to time a SIM doctor would come to listen to
his heart and give him an injection that revived him.

_ One day, or night, for in the jail it was impossible to know
the time, they took him out of the cell, naked and handcuffed,
made him climb the stairs, and pushed him into a small, sunlit
room. The white light blinded him. At last he recognized the
pale, elegant face of Ramfis Trujillo, and at his side, erect as always despite his years, his father, General Piro Estrella. When
he recognized the old man, Salvador’s eyes filled with tears.

But instead of being moved at seeing the desolate creature
his son had become, the general roared in indignation:

“T don’t know you! You’re not my son! Assassin! Traitor!”
He gesticulated, choking with rage. “Don’t you know what I,
you, all of us owe to Trujillo? He’s the man you murdered? Repent, you miserable wretch!”

He had to lean against a table because he began to reel. He
lowered his eyes. Was the old man pretending? Was he hoping
to win over Ramfis and then beg him to spare his life? Or was
his father’s Trujillista fervor stronger than his feelings for his
son? That doubt tore at him constantly, except during the torture sessions. These came every day, every two days, and now
they were accompanied by long, maddening interrogations in
which they repeated, a thousand and one times, the same questions, demanded the same details, and tried to make him de
396
nounce other conspirators. They never believed he did not
know anyone other than those they already knew about, or that
no one in his family had been involved, least of all Guarionex.
Johnny Abbes and Ramfis did not appear at those sessions;
they were conducted by subordinates who became familiar to
him: Lieutenant Clodoveo Ortiz, the lawyer Eladio Ramirez
Suero, Colonel Rafael Trujillo Reynoso, First Lieutenant Pérez
Mercado of the police. Some seemed to enjoy passing electric
prods along his body, or beating him on the head and back
with blackjacks covered in rubber, or burning him with
cigarettes; others seemed disgusted or bored. Always, at the
beginning of each session, one of the half-naked bailiffs responsible for administering the electric shocks would spray the
air with Nice to hide the stink of his defecations and charred
flesh.

One day—what day could it be?—they put in his cell Fifi
Pastoriza, Hudascar Tejeda, Modesto Diaz, Pedro Livio
Cedefio, and Tunti Caceres, Antonio de la Maza’s young
nephew, who, in the original Plan, was going to drive the car —
that Antonio Imbert eventually drove. They were naked and
handcuffed, like him. They had been in El Nueve the whole time,
in other cells, and received the same treatment of electric shocks,
whippings, burnings, and needles in the ears and under the nails.
And they had been subjected to endless interrogations.

From them he learned that Imbert and Luis Amiama had
disappeared, and that in his desperation to find them, Ramfis
was now offering half a million pesos to anyone facilitating
their capture. From them he also learned that Antonio de la
Maza, General Juan Tomas Diaz, and Amadito had died fighting. He had been kept in isolation, but they had been able to
talk with their jailers and learn what was happening on the outside. Hudscar Tejeda had heard from one of his torturers, with
whom he had become friendly, about the conversation between Ramfis Trujillo and Antonio de la Maza’s father. The
son of the Generalissimo came to inform Don Vicente de la
Maza, in prison, that his son had died. The old caudillo of

397
Moca asked, without a tremor 1n his voice: “Did he die fighting?” Ramfis nodded. Don Vicente de la Maza crossed himself:
“Thank you, Lord!”

It did him good to see that Pedro Livio Cedefio had recovered from his wounds. Nigger felt absolutely no rancor toward
Turk for shooting him in the confusion of that night. “What I
can’t forgive any of you for is not killing me,” he joked. “What
did you save my life for? For this? Assholes!” The resentment all
of them felt toward Pupo Romdn was very deep, but nobody
was happy when Modesto Dfaz said that from his cell on a
higher floor, he had seen Pupo naked, handcuffed, his eyelids
sewn shut, being dragged by four bailiffs to the torture chamber.
Modesto Diaz was not even the shadow of the elegant, intelligent politician he had been all his life; he had lost many kilos,
had wounds over his entire body, and wore an expression of
infinite despair. “That’s what I must look like,” thought Salvador. He had not looked in a mirror since his arrest.

He often asked his interrogators to allow him a confessor.
At last, the jailer who brought their meals asked who wanted a
priest. They all raised their hands. He had them put on
trousers and brought them up the steep staircase to the room
where Turk had been insulted by his father. To see the sun and
feel its warm touch on his skin renewed his spirit. Even more
so when he confessed and took communion, something he
thought he would never do again. When the military chaplain,
Father Rodriguez Canela, asked them to join him in a prayer in
memory of Trujillo, only Salvador kneeled down and prayed
with him. His companions, disconcerted, remained standing.

From Father Rodriguez Canela he learned the date: August 30, 1961. Only three months had gone by! To him it
seemed as if this nightmare had lasted for centuries. Depressed,
debilitated, demoralized, they spoke little among themselves,
and conversations always revolved around what they had seen,
heard, and experienced in El Nueve. Of all the statements his
cellmates made, the one indelibly etched into Salvador’s brain
was the story told by a sobbing Modesto Diaz. For the first

398
few weeks he had been in a cell with Miguel Angel Baez Diaz.
Turk remembered his surprise on May 30 when this individual
appeared in his Volkswagen on the San Cristébal highway to
assure them that Trujillo, with whom he had walked along the
Avenida, would come, which was how Salvador learned that
this powerful man among the Truyillista faithful was also part
of the conspiracy. Abbes Garcia and Ramfis, infuriated with
him because he had been so close to Trujillo, were present for
all the sessions of electric shocks, beatings, and burnings inflicted on him, and ordered the SIM doctors to revive him so
the torture could continue. After two or three weeks, instead
of the usual plate of foul-smelling corn mush, a pot with pieces
of meat was brought to them in their cell. Miguel Angel Béez
and Modesto gulped it down, choking, eating with both hands
until they were full. A short time later the jailer came in. He
confronted Bdez Diaz: General Ramfis Trujillo wanted to
know if eating his own son didn’t make him sick. From the
floor, Miguel Angel insulted him: “You can tell that filthy son
of a bitch for me that I hope he swallows his tongue and potsons himself.” The jailer started to laugh. He left and came
back, and from the door he showed them the head of a boy,
holding it up by the hair. Miguel Angel Béez Diaz died a few
hours later, in Modesto’s arms, of a heart attack.

The image of Miguel Angel recognizing the head of
Miguelito, his oldest son, obsessed Salvador; he had nightmares in which he saw Luisito and Carmen Elly decapitated.
He would scream in his sleep, annoying his cellmates.

Unlike his friends, several of whom had tried to end their
lives, Salvador was determined to resist until the end. He had
reconciled himself with God—he prayed day and night—and
the Church forbade suicide. Besides, it wasn’t easy to kill oneself. Hudscar Tejeda made the attempt with a tie he stole from
one of the jailers (who kept it folded in his back pocket). He
tried to hang himself but failed, and because he tried, his punishment intensified. Pedro Livio Cedefio tried to get himself
killed by provoking Ramfis in the torture chamber: “son of a

399
bitch,” “bastard,” “motherfucker,” “your slut of a mother La
Espafiolita worked in a whorehouse before she was Trujillo’s
girlfriend,” and he even spat on him. Ramfis did not fire the
shots he longed for: “Not yet, not so fast. That'll come at the
end. You have to keep paying first.”

The second time Salvador Estrella Sadhald learned the
date, it was October 9, 1961. They had him put on trousers,
and again he climbed the stairs to the room where the sunlight
hurt his eyes and brought joy to his skin. Ramfis was there,
pale and impeccable in his uniform of a four-star general, with
that day’s E/ Caribe in his hand: October 9, 1961. Salvador
read the large headline: “Letter from General Pedro A. Estrella
to General Ramfis, son of Rafael Leonidas Trujillo.”

“Read this letter your zane sent me.” Ramfis handed him
the paper. “He talks about you.”

Salvador, his wrists cut by handcuffs, grasped El Caribe.
He felt vertigo and an indefinable mixture of revulsion and
sadness, but he read the entire letter. General Piro Estrella
called the Goat “the greatest of all Dominicans,” boasted of
having been his friend, bodyguard, and protégé, and alluded to
Salvador with vile epithets; he spoke of “the felony of a son
gone astray” and of “my son’s treason when he betrayed his
protector” and his own family. Worse than the insults was the
final paragraph: his father thanked Ramfis, with bombastic servility, for giving him money to help him survive the confiscation of the family’s property because of his son’s participation
in the assassination.

He returned to his cell sick with disgust and shame. He
did not hold up his head again, although he attempted to hide
his demoralization from his companions. “It isn’t Ramfis, it’s
my father who has killed me,” he thought. And he envied Antonio de la Maza. What luck to be the son of a man like Don
Vicente!

A few days after that cruel October 9, when he and his five
cellmates were moved to La Victoria—they were hosed down
and the clothes they were wearing when they were arrested

400
were returned to them—Turk was a walking corpse. Not even
the possibility of having visitors—half an hour, on Thursdays—and hugging and kissing his wife, Luisito, and Carmen
Elly, could melt the ice that had formed around his heart after
he read General Piro Estrella’s public letter to Ramfis Trujillo.

In La Victoria the torture and interrogations stopped.
They still slept on the floor but were no longer naked: they
wore clothes sent to them from home. The handcuffs were removed. Their families could send food, soft drinks, and some
money, with which they bribed their jailers to sell them newspapers, give them information about other prisoners, or carry
messages to the outside. President Balaguer’s speech at the
United Nations, condemning the Trujillo dictatorship and
promising democratization “while maintaining order,”
brought a rebirth of hope in the prison. It seemed incredible,
but there was a burgeoning political opposition, with the Civic
Union and June 14 operating in the light of day. Above all, his
friends were encouraged to learn that in the United States,
Venezuela, and elsewhere, committees had been formed to demand that they be tried in a civil court, with international observers. Salvador made an effort to share the optimism of the
others. In his prayers, he asked God to give him back his hope.
Because he had none. He had seen the implacable expression
on Ramfis’s face. Would he let them go free? Never. He would
carry his revenge through to the end.

There was an explosion of rejoicing in La Victoria when it
was learned that Petén and Blacky Trujillo had left the country.
Now Ramfis would go too. Balaguer would have no recourse
but to declare an amnesty. Modesto Diaz, however, with his
powerful logic and cold analytical method, convinced them
that their families and attorneys had to mobilize in their defense, now more than ever. Ramfis would not leave before he
had exterminated his papa’s executioners. As he listened, Salvador observed the ruin that Modesto had become: he was still
losing weight and he had the face of a wrinkled old man. How
many kilos had he shed? The trousers and shirts his wife

401
brought swam on him, and every week he had to make new
holes in his belt. |

Salvador was always sad but spoke to no one about his father’s public letter, which he carried with him like a knife in the
back. Even though their plans did not work out as they had
hoped, and there had been so much death and so much suffering, their action had helped to change things. The news filtering
into the cells of La Victoria told of meetings, of young people
decapitating statues of Trujillo and tearing down plaques with
his name and the names of his family, of some exiles returning.
Wasn’t this the beginning of the end of the Trujillo Era? None of
it could have happened if they hadn’t killed the Beast.

The return of the Trujillo brothers was an ice-cold shower
for the prisoners in La Victoria. Making no effort to hide his
joy, on November 17 Major Américo Dante Minervino, the
prison warden, told Salvador, Modesto Diaz, Huascar Tejeda,
Pedro Livio, Fifi Pastoriza, and the young Tunti Caceres that
at nightfall they would be transferred to the cells in the Palace
of Justice because the next day there would be another reconstruction of the crime on the Avenida. They pooled all their
money and, through one of the jatlers, sent urgent messages to
their families, telling them that something suspicious was going on; there was no doubt the reconstruction was a farce and
Ramfis had decided to kill them.

At dusk the six men were handcuffed and taken away, with
an escort of three armed guards, in the kind of black van with
tinted windows that people in Santo Domingo called the Dogcatcher. Salvador closed his eyes and begged God to take care
of his wife and children. Contrary to their worst fears, they
were not taken to the cliffs, the regime’s favorite spot for secret
executions, but to the center of town and the Palace of Justice
at the Fairgrounds. They spent most of the night standing,
since the cell was so narrow they could not all sit down at the
same time. They took turns sitting, two by two. Pedro Livio
and Fiff Pastoriza were in good spirits; if they had been
brought here, the story about the reconstruction was true.

402
Their optimism infected Tunti Caceres and Hudscar Tejeda.
Yes, yes, why not? They’d be turned over to the Judicial
Branch to be tried by civilian judges. Salvador and Modesto
Diaz remained silent, concealing their skepticism.

In a very quiet voice, Turk whispered in his friends ear:
“This is the end, isn’t it, Modesto?” The lawyer nodded, not
saying anything, squeezing his arm.

Before the sun came up they were taken out of the prison
and put into the Dogcatcher again. There was an impressive
military deployment around the Palace of Justice, and Salvador, in the uncertain light, saw that all the soldiers wore Air
Force insignia. They were from San Isidro Air Base, the fiefdom of Ramfis and Virgilio Garcia Trujillo. He said nothing,
not wanting to alarm his companions. In the cramped van he
tried to talk to God, as he had for part of the night, asking that
He help him die with dignity, that he not dishonor himself
with any show of cowardice, but he could not concentrate
now. His failure caused him great anguish.

After a short drive, the van came to a stop. They were on
the San Cristébal highway. This had to be the site of the assassination. The sun gilded the sky, the coconut palms along the
road, the ocean that murmured as it broke against the rocks.
There were a great many guards. They had cordoned off the
highway and blocked traffic in both directions. ~

“As far as this circus is concerned, the boy turned out to be
as much of a clown as his papa,” he heard Modesto Diaz say.

“Why should it be a circus?” Fifi Pastoriza protested.
“Don’t be such a pessimist. Its a reconstruction. Even the
judges are here. Don’t you see?”

“The same kind of joke his papa liked,” Modesto insisted,
shaking his head in disgust.

Farce or not, it went on for many hours, until the sun was
in the middle of the sky and began to drill into their skulls.
One by one, they were made to pass in front of a campaign
table set up outdoors, where two men in civilian clothing
asked the same questions that had been asked in El Nueve and

403
La Victoria. Typists recorded their answers. Only low-ranking
officers were present. None of the top brass—Ramfis, Abbes
Garcia, Pechito Leén Estévez, Pirulo Sanchez Rubirosa—were
visible during the tedious ceremony. They were not given anything to eat, only some glasses of soda at noon. It was early
afternoon when the rotund warden of La Victoria, Major
Américo Dante Minervino, put in an appearance. He was
chewing nervously on his mustache and his face looked more
sinister than usual. He was accompanied by a corpulent black
with the flattened nose of a boxer, a submachine gun on his
shoulder and a pistol tucked into his belt. They were returned
to the Dogcatcher.

“Where are we going?” Pedro Livio asked Minervino.

“Back to La Victoria,” he said. “I came to take you back
myself so you won’t get lost.”

“What an honor,” replied Pedro Livio.

The major was behind the wheel and the black with the
boxer’s face sat beside him. The three guards escorting them in
the rear of the Dogcatcher were so young they looked like new
recruits. They seemed tense, overwhelmed by the responsibility
of guarding such important prisoners. In addition to handcuffs,
their ankles were tied rather loosely, allowing them to take
short steps.

“What the hell do these ropes mean?” Tunti Caceres
protested.

One of the guards pointed at the major and lifted a finger
to his mouth: “Quiet.”

During the long ride, Salvador realized they were not going
back to La Victoria, and judging by the faces of his companions, they had guessed the same thing. They were silent, some
with their eyes closed and others with their eyes opened wide,
and blazing, as if trying to see through the metal sides of the vehicle to find out where they were. He did not try to pray. His
anxiety was so great, it would have been useless. God would
understand.

When the van stopped, they heard the ocean crashing at

404
the foot of a high cliff. The guards opened the door. They were
at a deserted spot with reddish earth and sparse trees, on what
seemed to be a promontory. The sun was still shining, but it
had already begun its descending arc. Salvador told himself
that dying would be a way to rest. What he felt now was immense weariness.

Dante Minervino and the powerful black with the face of a
boxer had the three adolescent guards climb out of the van, but
when the six prisoners tried to follow, they stopped them:
“Stay where you are.” Immediately after that, they began to
fire. Not at them, at the young soldiers. The three boys fell,
riddled with bullets, without time to be surprised, to understand, to scream.

“What are you doing, what are you doing, you criminals
Salvador bellowed. “Why kill those poor guards? Murderers!”

“We're not killing them, you are,” Major Dante Minervino
replied, very seriously, as he reloaded his submachine gun; the
black with the flattened face rewarded him with a giggle. “And
now you can get out.”

Stunned, stupid with surprise, the six men were taken
down, and, stumbling—the ropes obliged them to move in
ridiculous little jumps—over the corpses of the three guards,
they were taken to another, identical van parked a few meters
- away. One man in civilian clothes was guarding it. After lock- ing them into the back of the van, the three men squeezed into
the front seat. Once again, Dante Mimervino was at the wheel.

And now Salvador could pray. He heard one of his companions sobbing, but this did not distract him. He prayed with
no difficulty, as he had in better times, for himself, his family,
the three guards who had just been murdered, his five companions in the van, one of whom, in an attack of nerves, was
cursing and banging his head against the metal plate that separated them from the driver.

He did not know how long this trip lasted, because he did
not stop praying for an instant. He felt peace and an immense
tenderness thinking of his wife and children. When they pulled

405

9
!
to a stop and opened the door, he saw the sea, the dusk, the
sun sinking in an inky blue sky.

The men pulled them out. They were in the courtyardgarden of a large house, next to a pool. There were a handful of
silver palms with lofty crowns, and, about twenty meters away,
a terrace with figures of men holding glasses. He recognized
Ramfis, Pechito Leén Estévez, Pechito’s brother Alfonso, Pirulo Sanchez Rubirosa, and two or three others he did not
know. Alfonso Leén Estévez ran over to them, still holding his
glass of whiskey. He helped Américo Dante Minervino and the
black boxer shove them toward the coconut palms.

“One at atime, Alfonso!” Ramfis ordered. “He’s drunk,”
Salvador thought. The son of the Goat had to get drunk to
give his last party.

The first one they shot was Pedro Livio, who collapsed instantly under the barrage of revolver and submachine-gun fire
that cut him down. Next, they pulled Tunti Caceres over to the
palms, and before he fell he insulted Ramfis: “Degenerate,
coward, faggot!” And then, Modesto Diaz, who shouted:
“Long live the Republic!” and lay writhing on the ground before he died. |

Then it was his turn. They did not have to shove or drag
him. Taking the short little steps allowed by the ropes around
his ankles, he walked by himself to the palm trees where his
friends were lying, thanking God that he had been permitted
to be with Him in his final moments, and telling himself, with
a certain melancholy, that he would never see Basquinta, the
Lebanese village left behind by the Sadhalas to preserve their
faith and seek their fortune in this land of our Lord.
