After Amadito left, Antonio Imbert remained
a while longer in the house of his cousin, Dr.
Manuel Duran Barreras. He had no hope that
Juan Tomas Diaz and Antonio de la Maza would find General
Roman. Perhaps the political-military Plan had been discovered and Pupo was dead or in prison; perhaps he had lost his
courage and stepped back. He had no alternative but to go into
hiding. He and his cousin Manuel reviewed his options before
deciding on a distant relative, Dr. Gladys de los Santos,
Durdn’s sister-in-law. She lived nearby.

In the small hours of the morning, when it was still dark,
Manuel Durén and Imbert walked the six blocks at a rapid pace
without seeing any vehicles or pedestrians. Dr. De los Santos
took some time to open the door. She was in her bathrobe,
and rubbed her eyes vigorously as they explained the situation.
She was not particularly frightened. She reacted with a strange
equanimity. A stout but agile woman in her forties, she displayed enormous self-assurance and regarded the world with
dispassion,

“Pll put you up the best I can,” she told Imbert. “But this
isn’t a safe hiding place. I was arrested once, and the SIM has
me in its files.”

To keep the maid from finding him, she put him in a windowless storeroom next to the garage, and placed a folding
mattress on the floor. It was a tiny, unventilated space. Antonio could not close his eyes for the rest of the night. He kept
the Colt .45 beside him, on a shelf filled with canned goods; he
was tense, his ears alert to any suspicious sound. He thought
about his brother Segundo, and his skin crawled: they must be
torturing him in La Victoria, or had already killed him.

2

 

442
Dr. De los Santos, who had locked the storeroom with a
key, came to let him out at nine in the morning.

“I gave the maid the day off so she could visit her family in
Jarabacoa.” She tried to cheer him. “You can move anywhere
you want in the house. But don’t let the neighbors see you.
What a night you must have spent in that cave.”

While they ate breakfast in the kitchen—mangu, fred
cheese, and coffee—they listened to the news. There was no
mention of the assassination on the radio. Dr. De los Santos
left for work a short while later. Imbert took a shower and
went down to the living room, where, sprawled in an armchair, he fell asleep, the Colt .45 on his lap. He gave a great
start and groaned when somebody shook him awake.

“The cali¢és took away Manuel this morning, not long after
you left his house,” said an extremely agitated Gladys de los
Santos. “Sooner or later theyll get it out of him that you’re
here. You have to go, right away.”

Yes, but where? Gladys had passed by the Imberts’ house,
and the street was crawling with guards and calés; no doubt
about it, they had arrested his wife and daughter. It seemed as
if invisible hands were beginning to tighten around his throat.
He hid his anguish so as not to increase the terror of Dr. De
los Santos, who was a changed woman, so perturbed she could
not stop blinking her eyes.

“There are caliés in Beetles and trucks full of guards everywhere,” she said. “They're searching cars, asking everybody for
papers, going into houses.”

Nothing had been reported yet on television or radio, or in
the papers, but rumors were flying. The human tom-tom was
sending the news all over the city that Trujillo had been killed.
People were frightened and confused about what might happen. For close to an hour he racked his brain: where could he
go? He had to leave now. He thanked Dr. De los Santos for her
help and went out, his hand on the pistol in his right trouser
pocket. He walked for some time, in no particular direction,
until he thought of his dentist, Dr. Camilo Suero, who lived

443
near the Military Hospital. Camilo and his wife, Alfonsina, let
him in. They could not hide him, but did help him go over
other possibilities. And then the image came into his mind of
Francisco Rainieri, an old friend, the son of an Italian, and an
ambassador of the Order of Malta; Francisco’s wife, Venecia,
and his wife, Guarina, had tea together and played canasta. Perhaps the diplomat could help him seek asylum in one of the
legations. Taking every precaution, he called the Rainieris’ residence and passed the receiver to Alfonsina, who pretended to
be Guarina Tessén, the maiden name of Imbert’s wife. She
asked to speak to Queco. He came to the phone immediately,
and she was startled by his extremely cordial greeting:

“How are you, my dear Guarina? [’m delighted to hear
from you. Youre calling about tonight, aren’t you? Don’t
worry. [li send the car for you. At seven sharp, if that’s all
right. Just give me your address again, all nght?”

“Either he’s a mind reader or he’s gone crazy or I don’t
know what,” said Alfonsina when she hung up the receiver.

“And now, what do we do until seven o’clock, Alfonsina?”

“Pray to Our Lady of Altagracta,” she said, and crossed
herself. “If the calzés come, just use your gun.”

At exactly seven a shiny blue Buick, with diplomatic plates,
stopped at the door. Francisco Rainieri was at the wheel. He
pulled away as soon as Antonio Imbert sat down beside him.

“I knew the message was from you because Guarina and
your daughter are at my house,” said Rainieri by way of greeting. “There aren’t two women named Guarina Tess6n in Ciudad
Trujillo, it could only have been you.”

He was very calm, even cheerful, wearing a freshly ironed
guayabera and smelling of lavender water. He drove Imbert to a
distant house, along remote streets, taking a huge detour because
there were roadblocks along the main streets where vehicles were
stopped and searched. Less than an hour had passed since the
official announcement of Trujillo’s death. The atmosphere was
heavy with apprehension, as if everyone were expecting an explosion. Elegant as always, the ambassador did not ask a single

444
question regarding Trujillo’s assassination or the other conspirators. Very casually, as if he were talking about the next tennis
championship at the Country Club, he remarked:

“With things the way they are, it’s unthinkable that any
embassy would give you asylum. And it wouldn’t do much
good. The government, if there is still a government, wouldn’t
respect it. They'd drag you out no matter where you were. The
only thing you can do, for the moment, is hide. At the Italian
consulate, where I have friends, there are too many employees
and visitors going back and forth. But I found someone, and
he’s totally reliable. He did this once before, when they were
hunting down Yuyo d’Alessandro. He has only one condition.
Nobody can know, not even Guarina. For her own safety,
more than anything else.”

“Of course,” Tony Imbert murmured, astounded that on his
own initiative this man who was no more than a casual friend
would risk so much to save his life. He was so disconcerted by
Queco’s daring generosity that he did not even manage to thank
him

At Rainteri’s house he embraced his wife and daughter.
Considering the circumstances, they were remarkably calm.
But when he held her in his arms, he could feel Leslie’s body
trembling. He stayed with them and the Rainieris for approximately two hours. His wife had brought an overnight bag for
him, with clean clothes and his shaving kit. They did not mention Trujillo. Guarina told him what she had learned from
neighbors. Their house had been stormed at dawn by uniformed and plainclothes police; they had emptied it, breaking
and smashing what they did not take away in two vans.

When it was time, the diplomat made a small gesture,
pointing at his watch. Antonio Imbert embraced and kissed
Guarina and Leslie, and followed Francisco Rainieri through
the service entrance onto the street. Seconds later, a small vehicle with headlights dimmed pulled to a stop in front of them.

“Goodbye, and good luck,” said Rainieri, shaking his hand.
“Don’t worry about your family. They won’t want for anything.”

445
Imbert got into the car and sat down next to the driver. He
was a young man, wearing a shirt and tie, but no jacket. In mpeccable Spanish, though with an Italian lilt, he introduced
himself: ,

“My name is Cavaglieri and I’m an official at the Italian
embassy. My wife and I will do everything possible to make
your stay at our apartment pleasant. Don’t worry, in my house
there are no prying eyes. We live alone. We don’t have a cook
or servants. My wife loves keeping house. And we both like to
cook.”

He laughed, and Antonio Imbert imagined that courtesy
required him to attempt a laugh as well. The couple lived on
the top floor of a new building, not far from Calle Mahatma
Gandhi and Salvador Estrella Sadhald’s house. Sefiora
Cavaglieri was even younger than her husband—a slender girl
with almond-shaped eyes and black hair—and she welcomed
him with lively, smiling courtesy, as if he were an old family
friend coming to spend the weekend. She did not display the
slightest misgiving at having a stranger in her house, the assassin of the country’s supreme ruler, the man whom thousands
of hate-filled guards and police were avidly hunting down.
During the six months and three days he lived with them,
never, not once, did either one make him feel—despite his extreme sensitivity and a situation that predisposed him to seeing
phantoms —that his presence was in any way an inconvenience.
Did they know they were risking their lives? Of course. They
heard and saw detailed reports on television of the panic those
nefarious assassins had provoked in Dominicans, many of
whom, not satisfied with denying them refuge, rushed to inform on them. The first one they saw fall was the engineer
Huascar Tejeda, shamefully forced out of the church of Santo
Cura de Ars by the terrified priest, and into the arms of the
SIM. They followed every detail of the odyssey of General
Juan Tomas Diaz and Antonio de la Maza as they drove
through the streets of Ciudad Trujillo in a taxi and were denounced by the people they turned to for help. And they saw

446
how the caliés killed Amadito Garcia Guerrero and then
dragged away the poor old woman who had given him shelter,
and how the mob dismantled and destroyed her house. But
these scenes and reports did not intimidate the Cavaglieris or
lessen their cordial treatment of him.

After Ramfis’s return, Imbert and his hosts knew that his
confinement would be a long one. The public embraces of
Trujillo’s son and General José René Romdn were eloquent:
Pupo had betrayed them, and there would be no military uprising. From his small universe in the Cavaglieris’ penthouse,
he saw the crowds standing in line, hour after hour, to pay
homage to Trujillo, and he saw himself on the television
screen, pictured beside Luts Amiama (whom he did not
know), under captions that offered first a hundred thousand,
then two hundred thousand, and finally half a million pesos to
anyone reporting his whereabouts.

“Hmm, with the devaluation of the Dominican peso, it’s
not an interesting deal anymore,” Cavaglieri remarked.

His life quickly fell into a strict routine. He had a small
room to himself, with a bed, a night table, and a lamp. He got
up early and did push-ups and sit-ups, and ran in place, for
about an hour. He had breakfast with the Cavaglieris. After
long discussions, he convinced them to let him help with the
cleaning. Sweeping, running the vacuum, passing the feather
duster over objects and articles of furniture, became both a diversion and an obligation, something he did conscientiously,
with total concentration and a certain joy. But Sefiora
Cavaglieri never allowed him into the kitchen. She cooked very
well, especially pasta, which she served twice a day. He had
liked pasta since he was a boy. But after six months of confinement, he would never again eat tagliarini, tagliatelle, ravioli, or
any other variant of that popular Italian specialty.

When his domestic chores were concluded, he read for
many hours. He had never been a great reader, but in those six
months he discovered the pleasure of books and magazines,
which were his best defense against the periodic depression

447
brought on by confinement, routine, and uncertainty.

When it was announced on television that a commission
from the OAS had come to interview political prisoners, he
learned that Guarina, along with the wives of all his friends in
the conspiracy, had been in prison for several weeks. The
Cavaglieris had kept Guarina’s arrest from him. But a few
weeks later, they were overjoyed to give him the good news
that she had been released.

Never, not even when he was mopping, sweeping, or running the vacuum, did he fail to keep the loaded Colt .45 with
him. His decision was unshakable. He would do the same as
Amadito, Juan Tomas Diaz, and Antonio de la Maza. He
would not be taken alive, he would die shooting. It was more
honorable to die that way than to be subjected to abuses and
tortures devised by the twisted minds of Ramfis and his
cronies.

In the afternoon and at night he read the papers his hosts
brought him and watched television newscasts with them.
Without believing much of what he saw and read, he followed
the confused dualism of the path the regime had embarked
upon: a civilian government led by Balaguer, who made reassuring gestures and statements asserting that the country was democratizing, and a military and police power, headed by
Ramfis, that continued to kill, torture, and disappear people
with the same impunity as when the Chief was alive. Yet he
could not help feeling encouraged by the return of the exiles, the
appearance of small opposition papers—published by the Civic
Union and June 14—and student demonstrations against the
government, which were sometimes reported in the official media, though only to accuse the protesters of being Communists.

Joaquin Balaguer’s speech at the United Nations, criticizing the Trujillo dictatorship and pledging to democratize the
country, left him dumbfounded. Was this the same little man
who for thirty-one years had been the most faithful and
constant servant of the Father of the New Nation? In their
long conversations at the table, when the Cavaglieris had sup
448
per at home—on many evenings they went out to eat, but then
Sefiora Cavagliert would prepare the inevitable pasta for him—
they filled in the gaps in his information with the gossip that
was churning through the city, soon rebaptized with its old
name, Santo Domingo de Guzman. Though everyone worried
about a coup by the Trujillo brothers that would restore the
cruel, harsh dictatorship, people clearly were losing their fear,
or, rather, breaking the spell that had kept so many Dominicans devoted, body and soul, to Trujillo. A growing number of
anti-Trujillista voices, declarations, and attitudes gradually appeared, as well as more support for the Civic Union, June 14,
or the Dominican Revolutionary Party, whose leaders had just
returned to the country and opened an office in the center of
the city.

The saddest day of his odyssey was also the happiest. On
November 18, as the departure of Ramfis was being announced, it was reported on television that the six assassins of
the Chief (four killers and two accomplices) had fled after murdering the three soldiers escorting them back to La Victoria
prison following a reconstruction of the crime. Sitting in front
- of the television screen, he lost control and burst into tears. So,
then, his friends—Turk, his dearest friend—had been killed,
along with three poor guards who provided the alibi for the
farce. Of course, the bodies would never be found. Sefior
Cavaglieri handed him a glass of cognac:

“Take heart, Sefior Imbert. Just think, soon you'll see your
wife and daughter. This is coming to an end.”

A short while later, there was an announcement of the imminent departure of the Trujillo brothers and their families.
This really was the end of his confinement. For the moment at
least, he had survived the hunt in which, with the exception of
_ Luis Amiama—he soon learned that he had spent six months
hiding in a closet for many hours a day—practically all of the
principal conspirators, along with hundreds of innocents,
among them his brother Segundo, had been killed or tortured,
or still languished in prison.

449
The day after the Trujillo brothers left the country, a political amnesty was declared. The jails began to open. Balaguer
announced a commission to investigate what had happened to
the “executioners of the tyrant.” From that day on, radio, television, and the newspapers stopped calling them assassins; executioners, their new designation, would soon become heroes,
and not long after that, streets, squares, and avenues all over
the country would begin to be renamed for them.

On the third day, very discreetly—the Cavaglieris would
not even allow him to take the time to thank them for what
they had done, and all they asked was that he not reveal their
identity to anyone, so as not to compromise their diplomatic
status —he left his confinement at dusk and appeared, alone, at
his house. For a long time he, Guarina, and Leslie embraced,
unable to speak. They examined one another and found that
while Guarina and Leslie had lost weight, he had gained five
kilos. He explained that in the house where he had been hiding —he could not tell them where—they ate a lot of spaghetti.

They could not speak for too long. The ruined house of
the Imberts began to fill up with bouquets of flowers and relatives, friends, and strangers, who came to embrace him, congratulate him, and—sometimes, trembling with emotion, their
eyes brimming with tears—to call him a hero and thank him
for what he had done. Suddenly, a military man appeared
among the visitors. He was an aide-de-camp to the President
of the Republic. After the obligatory greetings, Major Teofronio Caceda told him that he and Don Luis Amiama—who had
also just emerged from his hiding place, incredibly enough, the
house of the current Minister of Health—were invited to the
National Palace at noon tomorrow to be received by the Head
of State. And, with a complicitous little laugh, he informed
him that Senator Henry Chirinos had just introduced in
Congress (“Yes, sir, the same Trujillo Congress”) a law naming
Antonio Imbert and Luis Amiama three-star generals in the
Dominican Army for extraordinary services to the Nation.

The next morning, accompanied by Guarina and Leslie—

450
the three of them in their best clothes, though Antonio’s were
too tight—he kept his appointment at the Palace. A swarm of
photographers greeted them, and a military guard in dress uniforms presented arms. In the waiting room he met Luis
Amiama, a very slim, somber man with- an almost lipless
mouth who would be his inseparable friend from that time on.
They shook hands and agreed to meet, after their audience
with the President, to visit the wives (the widows) of all the
conspirators who had died or disappeared, and to tell each
other their own adventures. At that point, the door to the office of the Head of State opened.

Smiling, wearing an expression of deep joy, as the photographers’ cameras flashed, Dr. Joaquin Balaguer walked
toward them, arms opened wide.

451
