Y” “Ah, now I know who it is,” said Antonio de la Maza.
- He opened the car door, still holding the sawedPoff rifle in his hand, and climbed out onto the highway. None of his companions—Tony, Estrella Sadhala, and
Amadito—followed him; from inside the vehicle they watched
his robust silhouette, outlined against shadows the faint moonlight barely illuminated, as he moved toward the small Volkswagen that had parked near them, its headlights turned off.

“Don’t tell me the Chief changed his mind,” Antonio exclaimed by way of greeting as he put his head in the window
and brought his face up close to the driver and only occupant,
a man in a suit and tie, gasping for breath and so fat it didn’t
seem possible he could have gotten into the car, where he
seemed trapped. )

“Not at all, Antonio,” Miguel Angel Baez Diaz reassured
him, his hands clutching the wheel. “He’s going to San
Cristébal no matter what. He’s been delayed because after his
walk on the Malecon he took Pupo Roman to San Isidro Air
Base. I came to put your mind at ease, I could imagine how
impatient you were. He'll show up any minute now. Be
ready.”

“We won't fail, Miguel Angel, I hope you people won’t
either.”

They talked for a moment, their faces very close together,
the fat man holding the wheel and De la Maza constantly looking toward the road from Ciudad Trujillo, afraid the automobile would suddenly materialize and he wouldn’t have time to
get back to his car. 7

“Goodbye, good luck with everything,” said Miguel Angel
Baez Diaz.

 

86

Fos Tose cai 2, ke gee
He drove away, heading back to Ciudad Trujillo, his headlights still turned off. Standing on the road, feeling the cool air
and listening to the waves breaking a few meters away—he felt
drops on his face and scalp, where his hair was beginning to
thin—Antonio watched the car disappear in the distance,
blending into the night where the lights of the city and its
restaurants, filled with people, were twinkling. Miguel Angel
seemed confident. There was no doubt, then: he would come,
and on this Tuesday, May 30, 1961, Antonio would at last fulfill the vow he had sworn on the family ranch in Moca, before
his father, his brothers and sisters, his brothers- and sisters-inlaw, four years and four months ago, on January 7, 1957, the
day they buried Tavito.

He thought about how close the Pony was, and how good
it would be to have a glass of rum with lots of ice, sitting on
one of the rush-bottomed stools at the little bar, as he had so
often in recent days, and feel the alcohol going to his head, distracting him, distancing him from Tavito and the bitterness,
the frustration, the fever that had been his life since the cowardly murder of his younger brother, the one closest to him,
the one he loved best. “Especially after the terrible lies they
made up about him, to kill him a second time,” he thought.
He returned slowly to the Chevrolet. It was a brand-new car
that Antonio had imported from the United States and souped
up and refined, explaining at the garage that as a landowner,
and the manager of a sawmill in Restauracién, on the Haitian
border, he spent a good part of the year traveling and needed a
faster, more reliable car. The time had come to test out this
late-model Chevrolet, capable, thanks to adjustments to the
cylinders and engine, of reaching two hundred kilometers an
hour in a few moments, something the Generalissimo’s automobile was in no condition to do. He sat down again next to
Antonio Imbert.

“Who was it?” said Amadito from the back seat.

“Those are things you don’t ask,” muttered Tony Imbert
without turning around to look at Lieutenant Garcia Guerrero.

87
“It’s no secret now,” said Antonio de la Maza. “It was
Miguel Angel Bé4ez. You were right, Amadito. He’s definitely
going to San Cristdbal tonight. He was delayed, but he won’t
leave us hanging.”

“Miguel Angel Baez Diaz?” Salvador Estrella Sadhala whistled. “He’s involved too? You couldn’t ask for more. He’s the
ultimate Trujillista. Wasn’t he vice president of the Dominican
Party? He’s one of the men who walk every day with the Goat
along the Malecon, kissing his ass, and go with him every Sunday to the Hipédromo.”

“He walked with him today too.” De la Maza nodded.
“That’s why he knows he’s coming.”

There was a long silence.

“I know we have to be practical, that we need them,” Turk
said with a sigh. “But I swear it makes me sick that somebody
like Miguel Angel i is our ally now.”

“Now the saint, the puritan, the little angel with clean
hands has been heard from.” Imbert made an effort to joke.
“You see now, Amadito, why it’s better not to ask, better not
to know who else is in this?”

“You talk as if all of us hadn’t been Tnujillistas too, Salvador,” Antonio de la Maza growled. “Wasn’t Tony governor
of Puerto Plata? Isn’t Amadito a military adjutant? Haven't I
managed the Goat’s sawmills in Restauracién for the past
twenty years? And the construction company where you work,
doesn’t it belong to Trujillo too?”

“I take it back.” Salvador patted De la Maza’s arm. “I talk
too much and say stupid things. You’re right. Anybody could
say about us what I just said about Miguel Angel. I didn’t say
anything and you didn’t hear anything.”

But he had said it, because despite his serene, reasonable
air that everyone liked so much, Salvador Estrella Sadhala was
capable of saying the cruelest things, driven by a spirit of justice that would suddenly take possession of him. He had said
them to Antonio, his lifelong friend, in an argument when De
la Maza could have shot him. “I wouldn’t sell my brother for a

88
couple of bucks.” Those words, which kept them apart, not
seeing or talking to each other for more than six months, came
back to Antonio from time to time like a recurring nightmare.
Then he had to have a lot of rum, one drink after the other.
Though with inebriation came those blind rages that made
him belligerent and drove him to provoke a fight, punching
and kicking anybody near him.

He had turned forty-seven a few days earlier and was one
of the oldest in the group of seven men stationed on the highway to San Cristdbal, waiting for Trujillo. In addition to the
four in the Chevrolet, Pedro Livio Cedefio and Hudscar Tejeda
Pimentel sat two kilometers further on, in a car lent by Estrella
Sadhald, and a kilometer past them, alone in his own vehicle,
was Roberto Pastoriza Neret. Their plan was to cut Trujillo
off, and in a barrage of fire from the front and the rear, leave
him no escape. Pedro Livio and Hudscar must be as edgy as the
four of them. And Roberto even worse, with no one to talk to
and keep up his spirits. Would he come? Yes, he would come.
And the long calvary that Antonio’s life had been since the
murder of Tavito would end. .

The moon, round as a coin and accompanied by a blanket
of stars, gleamed and turned the crests of the nearby coconut
palms silver; Antonio watched them sway to the rhythm of the
breeze. In spite of everything this was a beautiful country,
damn it. It would be even more beautiful after they had killed
the devil who in thirty-one years had violated and poisoned it
more than anything else it had suffered in its history of Haitian
occupation, Spanish and American invasions, civil wars, battles
among factions and caudillos, and in all the catastrophes—earthquakes, hurricanes—that had assailed Dominicans from the sky, the sea, or the center of the earth. More than
anything else, what he could not forgive was that just as he had
corrupted and brutalized this country, the Goat had also corrupted and brutalized Antonio de la Maza.

He hid his turmoil from his companions by lighting another cigarette. Without removing the cigarette from his lips,

89
he exhaled smoke from his mouth and nose, caressing the
sawed-off rifle, thinking about the steel-reinforced bullets prepared especially for tonights business by his Spanish friend
Bissié, whom he had met through another conspirator, Manuel
de Ovin Filpo, and who was a weapons expert and a magnificent shot. Almost as good as Antonio de la Maza, who, since
childhood, on the family land at Moca, had always amazed parents, brothers and sisters, relatives, and friends with his shooting. That was why he occupied the privileged seat, to the nght
of Imbert: so he could shoot first. The group, who argued so
much about everything, agreed immediately on that: Antonio
de la Maza and Lieutenant Garcia Guerrero, the best marksmen, should carry the rifles supplied to the conspirators by the
CIA and sit on the right so they could hit the target with their
first shot.

One of the things that made Moca and his family proud
was that from the very beginning—1930—the De la Mazas
had been anti-Trujillista. Naturally. In Moca everyone, from
the most privileged landowner to the poorest peon, was Horacista, because President Horacio Vazquez came from Moca
and was the brother of Antonio’s mother. Starting on the first
day, the De la Mazas viewed with suspicion and antipathy the
intrigues employed by the brigadier general at the head of the
National Police—created by the Americans during the occupation, it became the Dominican Army when they left— Rafael
Leonidas Trujillo, to bring down Don Horacio Vazquez and,
in 1930, in the first crooked elections in his long history of
electoral fraud, have himself elected President of the Republic.
When this occurred, the De la Mazas did what patrician families and regional caudillos traditionally did when they didn’t
like the government: they took to the mountains with men
armed and financed out of their own pockets.

For almost three years, with short-lived intervals of peace,
from the time he was seventeen until he was twenty, Antonio
de la Maza—an athlete, a tireless horseman, a passionate
hunter, high-spirited, bold, and in love with life—along with

90
his father, uncles, and brothers, fought Trujillo’s forces with
guns, though without much effect. Gradually Trujillo’s men
dissolved the armed bands, inflicting some defeats but above
all buying off their lieutenants and supporters until, weary and
almost ruined, the De la Mazas finally accepted the government’s peace offers and returned to Moca to work their semiabandoned land. Except for the indomitable, pigheaded
Antonio. He smiled, remembering his stubbornness at the end
of 1932 and the beginning of 1933 when, with fewer than
twenty men, among them his brothers Ernesto and Tavito,
who was still a boy, he attacked police stations and ambushed
government patrols. The times were so unusual that despite
the military activity, the three brothers could almost always
sleep at their family home in Moca several days a month. Until
the ambush on the outskirts of Tamboril, when the soldiers
killed two of his men and wounded Ernesto, and Antonio
himself.

From the Military Hospital in Santiago he wrote to his father, Don Vicente, saying that he regretted nothing and asking
that the family please not humble itself by asking Trujillo for
clemency. Two days after giving the letter to the head nurse,
along with a generous tip to make sure it reached Moca, an
Army van came to take him, handcuffed and with a guard, to
Santo Domingo. (The Congress of the Republic would not
change the name of the ancient city until three years later.) To
the surprise of young Antonio de la Maza, the military vehicle,
instead of depositing him in prison, took him to Government
House, which in those days was near the old cathedral. They
removed his handcuffs and led him to a carpeted room, where
he found General Trujillo, in uniform, and impeccably shave
and combed. |

It was the first time he had seen him.

“You need balls to write a letter like this.” The Head of
State made it dance in his hand. “You’ve shown that you have
them, making war on me for almost three years. That’s why I
wanted to see your face. Is it true what they say about your

91
marksmanship? We ought to compete some time and see if it’s
better than mine.”

Twenty-eight years later, Antonio recalled that highpitched, cutting voice, that unexpected cordiality diluted by a
touch of irony. And those penetrating eyes whose gaze he—
with all his pride—could not endure.

“The war is over. P’'ve put an end to the power of the regional caudillos, including the De la Mazas. Enough shooting.
We have to rebuild the country, which is falling to pieces. I
need the best men beside me. You’re impulsive and you know
how to fight, don’t you? Good. Come and work with me.
Yow'll have a chance to do some shooting. I’m offering you a
position of trust in the military adjutants assigned to guard me.
That way, if I disappoint you one day, you can put a bullet in
me.”

“But ’m not a soldier,” stammered the young De la Maza.

“From this moment on you are,” said Trujillo. “Lieutenant
Antonio de la Maza.”

It was his first concession, his first defeat at the hands of
that master manipulator of innocents, fools, and imbeciles,
that astute exploiter of men’s vanity, greed, and stupidity. For
how many years did he have Trujillo less than a meter away?
Just like Amadito these past two years. You would have spared
the country, and the De la Maza family, so much tragedy if you
had done then what you’re going.to do now. Tavito would
certainly still be alive.

Behind him he could hear Amadito and Turk talking; from
time to time, Imbert became involved in the conversation. It
probably didn’t surprise them that Antonio remained silent; he
never had much to say, although his taciturnity had deepened
into muteness since the death of Tavito, a cataclysm that affected him in a way he knew was irreversible, turning him into
a man with a single fixed idea: killing the Goat.

“Juan Tomas’s nerves must be in worse shape than ours,”
he heard Turk say. “Nothing’s more horrible than waiting. But
is he coming or not?”

92
“Any minute now,” Lieutenant Garcia Guerrero pleaded.
“Trust me, damn it.”

Yes, at this moment General Juan Tomas Diaz must have
been in his house in Gazcue biting his nails, asking himself if it
had finally happened, the thing that Antonio and he had
dreamed about, stroked, plotted, kept alive and secret for precisely four years and four months. That is, since the day when,
following that damn interview with Trujillo, and with Tavito’s
body recently buried, Antonio jumped in his car and at a hundred twenty kilometers an hour drove to see Juan Tomas on
his ranch in La Vega.

“For the sake of twenty years of friendship, help me, Juan
Tomas. I have to kill him! I have to avenge Tavito!”

The general put his hand over his friend’s mouth. He
looked around, indicating with a gesture that the servants
could hear them. He took him behind the stables, where they
usually did target practice.

“We'll do it together, Antonio. To avenge Tavito and so
many other Dominicans for the shame we carry inside us.”

Antonio and Juan Tomas had been close friends since the
time De la Maza had been one of the Benefactor’s military ad jutants. The only good thing he could remember of the two
years when as a lieutenant, then as a captain, he shared the
Generalissimo’s life, accompanying him on his trips into the
interior, on his departures from Government House to go to
the Congress, the Hipdéddromo, receptions and performances,
political meetings and amorous trysts, visits and appointments
with associates, allies, and cronies, public, private, and ultrasecret meetings. Without ever becoming a staunch Trujillista,
as Juan Tomas was back then, and though secretly harboring
some of the rancor every Horacista felt toward the person who
had ended the political career of President Horacio Vazquez,
Antonio could not resist the magnetism that radiated from the
tireless man who could work for twenty hours and then, after
two or three hours of sleep, begin at dawn the next day as fresh
as an adolescent. The man who, according to popular legend,

93
did not sweat, did not sleep, never had a wrinkle on his uniform, his tuxedo, or his street clothes, and who, during the
years Antonio was part of his iron guard, had, in effect, transformed this country. Not only because of the highways,
bridges, and industries he built, but also because in every
sphere—political, military, institutional, social, economic—he
was amassing such extraordinary power that all the dictators
the Dominican Republic had endured in its entire history as a
republic—including Ulises Heureaux (Lilis), who had once
seemed so merciless—were pygmies compared to him.

In Antonio’s case, respect and fascination never turned into
admiration, never became the abject, servile love other Truyillistas professed for their leader. Including Juan Tomas, who, —
since 1957, had explored with him all the possible ways they
could rid the Dominican Republic of the figure who was
crushing it and sucking it dry, but in the 1940s was a fanatical
follower of the Benefactor, capable of committing any crime
for the man whom he considered the nation’s savior, the statesman who had returned to Dominican control the customs ser- _
_ vice formerly administered by the Yankees, resolved the
problem of foreign debt to the United States and earned the title, granted to him by the Congress, of Restorer of Financial
Independence, and created a modern, professional Armed
Forces, the best-equipped in the Caribbean. During those
years, Antonio would not have dared to speak ill of Trujillo to
Juan Tomds Diaz, who scaled the ranks of the Army until he
became a three-star general and obtained command of the Military Region of La Vega, where he was caught off guard by the
invasion of July 14, 1959, which was the beginning of his fall
into disgrace. After that happened, Juan Tomas no longer had
any illusions about the regime. When they were alone, when
he was sure nobody could hear him, when they were hunting
in the hills of Moca or La Vega, during family dinners on Sundays, he confessed to Antonio that everything mortified him—
the assassinations, the disappearances, the tortures, the
precariousness of life, the corruption, the surrender of body,

94
soul, and conscience by millions of Dominicans to a single
man.
Antonio de la Maza had never been a heartfelt Truyillista.
Not as a military adjutant, and not later, when after asking for
the Chief’s permission to leave the military, he worked for him
in civilian life, managing the Trujillo family’s sawmills in
Restauracién. He clenched his teeth in disgust: he had never
been able to stop working for him. As a soldier or as a civilian,
for more than twenty years he had contributed to the fortune
and power of the Benefactor and Father of the New Nation. It
was the great failure in his life. He never knew how to free
himself from the snares Trujillo set for him. Hating him with
all his might, he had continued to serve him, even after
Tavito’s death. That was the reason for Turk’s insult: “I wouldnt sell my brother for a couple of bucks.” He hadn’t sold
Tavito. He had dissembled and swallowed his rancor. What
else could he do? Let himself be killed by Johnny Abbes’s caliés
so he could die with a clear conscience? It wasn’t a clear conscience that Antonio wanted. He wanted revenge for himself
_ and for Tavito. And to get it he had swallowed all the shit in
the world during these past four years, even having to hear one
of his closest friends say what a good many people, he was
sure, repeated behind his back.

He hadn’t sold Tavito. His younger brother had been a
dear friend. Unlike Antonio, the ingenuous, boyishly innocent
Tavito had been a convinced Truyillista, one of those who
thought of the Chief as a superior being. They often argued
about it, because it irritated Antonio when his younger brother
repeated, like a refrain, that Trujillo was heaven’s gift to the
Republic. Well, it was true, the Generalissimo had done favors
for Tavito. Thanks to his orders Tavito had been accepted into
the Air Force and learned to fly—his dream since childhood—
and then was hired as a pilot for Dominican Airlines, which allowed him to make frequent trips to Miami, something his
younger brother loved because he could fuck blondes there.
Before that, Tavito had been in London, as military attaché,

95
and in a drunken argument had shot and killed Luis
Bernardino, the Dominican consul. Trujillo saved him from
prison by claiming he had diplomatic immunity and ordered
the court in Ciudad Trujillo, where he was tried, to absolve
him. Yes, Tavito had his reasons for feeling grateful to Trujillo
and, as he told Antonio, for being “ready to give my life for the
Chief and do anything he orders me to.” A prophetic statement, damn it.

“Yes, you gave your life for him,” Antonio thought as he
smoked his cigarette. The affair in which Tavito became embroiled in 1956 had smelled bad to him from the start. His
brother came to tell him about it, because Tavito told him everything. Even this, which had the air of one of those murky
operations that had filled Dominican history since Truyillo’s
rise to power. But Tavito, the dumb shit, instead of feeling uneasy, covering his ears, being alarmed at the mission he had
been entrusted with—picking up a drugged and masked individual in Montecristi, who was taken off a plane that had come
from the United States, and flying him in a small, unregistered
Cessna to the Fundacién Ranch in San Cristébal—was delighted, taking it as a sign that the Generalissimo trusted him.
Not even when the press in the United States expressed outrage, and the White House began to pressure the Dominican
government to facilitate the investigation into the abduction,
in New York, of Professor Jesus de Galindez, a Spanish
Basque, did Tavito show the slightest concern.

“This Galindez business looks very serious,” Antonio
warned him. “That’s the guy you took from Montecristi to
Trujillo’s ranch, who else could it be. They kidnapped him in
New York and brought him here. Keep your mouth shut. Forget all about it. You’re risking your life, Tavito.”

Now Antonio de la Maza had a good idea of what happened to Jestis de Galindez, one of the Spanish Republicans to
whom Trujillo, in the kind of contradictory political operation
that was his specialty, gave asylum in the Dominican Republic
at the end of the Civil War. Antonio hadn’t met this professor,

96
but many of his friends had, and from them he learned that he
had worked for the government in the State Department of
Labor and at the School of Diplomacy, attached to Foreign
Relations. In 1946 he left Ciudad Trujillo and settled in New
York, where he began to help Dominican exiles and write
against the Trujillo regime, which he knew from the inside.

In March 1956, Jesuis de Galindez, who had become an
American citizen, disappeared after being seen, for the last
time, coming out of a subway station on Broadway, in the
heart of Manhattan. A few weeks earlier, publication had been
announced of his book on Trujillo; he had submitted it as his
doctoral dissertation at Columbia University, where he was already teaching. The disappearance of an obscure Spanish exile,
in a city and a country where so many people disappeared,
would have passed unnoticed, and no one would have paid attention to the outcry from Dominican exiles, if Galindez had
not been an American citizen and, above all, if he had not
worked for the CIA, a fact that was revealed when the scandal
broke. The powerful machinery that Trujillo had in the United
States—journalists, congressmen, lobbyists, lawyers, and promoters—could not contain the explosion of indignation in the
press, beginning with The New York Times, and among many
- representatives in Congress, at the possibility that a tinhorn
Caribbean dictator would dare to abduct and murder an American citizen on American soil.

In the weeks and months that followed the disappearance
of Galindez, whose body was never found, the investigation by
the press and the FBI unequivocally proved the regime’s complete responsibility. A short while before it happened, General
Espaillat, Razor, had been named Dominican consul in New
York. The FBI identified compromising inquiries regarding
Galindez by Minerva Bernardino, the Dominican ambassador
to the UN and a woman close to Trujillo. Even more serious
was the FBI’s identification of a small plane with a false registration, flown by a pilot without a proper license, that took off
illegally on the night of the kidnapping from a small airport on

97
Long Island, heading for Florida. The pilot was named Murphy, and from that time on he lived in the Dominican Republic, working for Dominican Airlines. Murphy and Tavito flew
together and had become good friends.

Antonio learned all this in bits and pieces (censorship did
not allow the Dominican press and radio to mention the subject) in broadcasts from Puerto Rico, Venezuela, or the Voice
of America, which could be picked up on shortwave, or in
copies of the Miami Herald or The New York Times that filtered
into the country in the bags and uniforms of pilots and airline
attendants.

Seven months after the disappearance of Galindez, Murphy’s name suddenly appeared in the international press as the
pilot of the plane that had taken an anesthetized Galindez out
of the United States and brought him to the Dominican Republic, and Antonio, who had met Murphy through Tavito—
the three of them had shared a paella washed down with wine
from La Rioja in the Casa de Espafia on Calle de Padre
Billini—jumped into his van in Tiroli, near the Haitian border,
and with the accelerator down to the floor and his brain about
to burst with grim conjectures, drove to Ciudad Tnyillo. He
found Tavito in his house, calmly playing bridge with his wife,
Altagracia. In order not to worry his sister-in-law, Antonio
took him to a noisy club, Tipico Najayo, where the music of
the Ramon Gallardo Combo and its singer Rafael Martinez allowed for conversation that could not be overheard by the
wrong ears. After ordering kid stew and two bottles of Presidente beer, and with no further preamble, Antonio advised
Tavito to request asylum at an embassy. His younger brother
burst into laughter: what bullshit. He didn’t even know that
Murphy’s name was in every American newspaper. He wasn’t
worried. His confidence in Trujillo was as prodigious as his
naivete.

“Tl have to tell that gringo all about it,” a horrified Antonio
heard him say. “He’s selling his things, he’s decided to go back
to the States to get married. He’s engaged to a girl in Oregon. If

98
he goes there now it would be like putting his head in the lion’s
mouth. Nothing will happen to him here. The Chief rules here,
Antonio.”

Antonio did not allow him to joke. Without raising his
voice or attracting the attention of nearby tables, with muted
fury at so much innocence, he tried to make him understand:

“Don’t you get it, asshole? This is serious. The Galindez
kidnapping has put Trujillo in a very delicate situation with the
Yankees. Everybody involved in the kidnapping is at risk. Murphy and you are very dangerous witnesses. And you maybe
more than Murphy. Because you’re the one who took Galindez
to the Fundacién Ranch, to Trujillo’s own house. Where’s
your head?”

“I didn’t take Galfndez,” his brother insisted, and he
clinked his glass against Antonio’s. “I took some guy I didn’t
know, and he was dead drunk. I don’t know anything. Why
don’t you trust the Chief? Didn’t he trust me with a really important mission?”

When they said goodbye that night, at the door of Tavito’s
house, he had finally, on the insistence of his older brother,
said okay, he would think over his suggestion. And not to
worry: he'd keep his mouth shut.

It was the last time Antonio saw him alive. Three days after
their conversation, Murphy disappeared. When Antonio came
back to Ciudad Trujillo, Tavito had been arrested. He was being held incommunicado in La Victoria. Antonio went in person to request an audience with the Generalissimo, but the
Chief would not receive him. He tried to speak to Colonel Cobian Parra, head of the SIM, but he had become invisible, and
shortly afterward, on Trujillo’s orders, a soldier killed him in
his office. In the next forty-eight hours, Antonio called or visited all the leaders and high officials in the regime whom he
knew, from the President of the Senate, Agustin Cabral, to the
president of the Dominican Party, Alvarez Pina. All of them
had the same uneasy expression, all of them said that the best
thing he could do, for his own security and theirs, was to stop

99
calling and seeing people who could not help him and whom
he was also putting in danger. “It was like banging your head
against the wall,” Antonio later told General Juan Tomas Diaz.
If Trujillo had received him, he would have begged, he would
have gone down on his knees, anything to save Tavito.

Not long after this, at dawn, a SIM car carrying armed calvés in civilian clothes stopped at the door of Tavito de la Maza’s
house. They took his body out of the vehicle and carelessly
threw it into the heartsease in the little garden at the entrance.
And as they were driving away they yelled at Altagracia, who
had come to the door in her nightgown and was looking at the
corpse in horror:

“Your husband hung himself in jail. We brought him back
so you could give him a decent burial.”

“But not even that was the worst thing,” thought Antonio.
No, seeing Tavito’s corpse, the rope of his alleged suicide still
around his neck, his body tossed out like a dog’s at the entrance to his house by the thuggish killers who were the calsés
of the SIM, that wasn’t the worst. Antonio had repeated this to
himself dozens, hundreds of times over these four and a half
years, as he devoted his days and nights, and the remnants of
lucidity and intelligence he still possessed, to planning
the revenge that—God willing—would become a reality
tonight. The worst had been Tavito’s second death just days after the first one, when, making use of its entire informational
and publicity apparatus—El Caribe and La Nacwn, the Dominican Voice television and radio stations, the radio stations
of the Voice of the Tropics and Caribbean Radio, and a dozen
small regional newspapers and radio stations—the regime, in
one of its cruelest masquerades, published a letter allegedly
written by Octavio de la Maza explaining his suicide. His remorse for having killed with his own hands his friend and colleague at Dominican Airlines, the pilot Murphy! Not satisfied
with ordering his murder, the Goat, to wipe out all clues in the
Galindez story, added the macabre refinement of turning
Tavito into a killer. In this way he got rid of two troublesome

100
witnesses. To make everything even viler, Tavito’s handwritten
letter explained why he killed Murphy: the American was a
homosexual. Murphy had so pursued Antonio’s younger
brother, with whom he had fallen in love, that Tavito, reacting
with all the energy of a real man, erased the stain to his honor
by killing the degenerate and hid his crime by pretending it
was an accident.

He had to bend over where he sat in the Chevrolet, pressing the sawed-off rifle against his stomach, to hide the spasm
he had just felt. His wife kept telling him to go to the doctor,
the pains might be an ulcer or something even more serious,
but he refused. He didn’t need doctors to tell him that his
body had deteriorated in recent years, reflecting the bitterness
in his spirit. After what happened to Tavito, he had lost all
hope, all enthusiasm, all love for this life or the next. Only the
idea of revenge kept him active; he lived only to keep the vow
he had sworn aloud, terrifying the neighbors in Moca who had
come to sit with the De la Mazas—parents, brothers and sisters, brothers- and sisters-in-law, nieces and nephews, sons and
daughters, grandchildren, aunts and uncles—during the wake.

“I swear to God Pil kill the son of a bitch who did this with
my own hands!”

Everybody knew he was referring to the Benefactor, to the
Father of the New Nation, to Generalissimo Dr. Rafael L. Trujulo Molina, whose funeral wreath of fresh, fragrant flowers
was the most elaborate in the viewing room at the mortuary.
The De la Maza family did not dare to refuse it or remove it
from the room; it was so visible that everyone who came to
cross themselves and say a prayer next to the coffin knew that
the Chief had sent his condolences for the tragic death of this
aviator, “one of the most faithful, loyal, and brave of my followers,” according to the sympathy card.

On the day following his burial, two military adjutants
from the Palace got out of a Cadillac with an official license
plate in front of the De la Maza house in Moca. They had
come for Antonio.

101
“Am I under arrest?”

“Not at all,” First Lieutenant Roberto Figueroa Carrion
quickly explained. “His Excellency wishes to see you.”

Antonio didn’t bother to put a pistol in his pocket. He assumed that before he went into the National Palace, if they
really were taking him there and not to La Victoria or La
Cuarenta, or if they didn’t have orders to throw him over some
cliff along the road, they would disarm him. He didn’t care.
He knew how strong he was, and he also knew that his
strength, doubled by his hatred, would be enough to kill the
tyrant, as he had sworn to do the night before. He pondered
that decision, resolved to carry it out, knowing they would kill
him before he could escape. He would pay that price if he
could put an end to the despot who had ruined his life and the
life of his family.

When he got out of the official car, the adjutants escorted
him to the Benefactor’s office without anyone searching him.
The officers must have had precise instructions: as soon as the
unmistakable high-pitched voice said, “Come in,” First Lieutenant Roberto Figueroa Carrién and his companion left, allowing him to go in alone. The office was in semidarkness
because of the partially closed shutters on the window facing
the garden. The Generalissimo, sitting at his desk, wore a uniform that Antonio did not recognize: a long white tunic, with
tails and gold buttons and large epaulets with gold-colored
fringe on his chest, where a multicolored fan of medals and
decorations was hanging. He wore light blue flannel trousers
with a white stripe down the sides. He must have been getting
ready to attend some military ceremony. The light from the
desk lamp illuminated the broad, carefully shaved face, meticulously arranged gray hair, and the small brush mustache that
copied Hitler's (whom, Antonio had heard the Chief say once,
he admired, “not for his ideas but for the way he wore a uniform and presided over parades”). That fixed, direct gaze
bored into Antonio as soon as he came through the door. Tru
jillo spoke after observing him for a long time:
102
“I know you think I had Octavio killed and that his suicide
was a farce set up by the Intelligence Service. I had you come
to tell you personally that youre wrong. Octavio was a man of
the regime. He was always a loyal Trujillista. P've just appointed a commission, under the leadership of the Attorney
General of the Republic, Francisco Elpidio Beras. With broad
powers to question everyone, military and civilian. If the story
of his suicide is a lie, the guilty parties will pay.”

He spoke without animosity and without inflection, looking into Antonio’s eyes in the direct, peremptory manner with
which he always spoke to subordinates, both fnends and ene- |
mies. Antonio remained motionless, more determined than
ever to attack the hypocrite and wring his neck without giving
him time to call for help. As if to make the job easier for him,
Trujillo stood and walked toward him with slow, solemn steps.
His black shoes shone even brighter than the waxed wood in
his office.

“T also authorized the FBI to come here and investigate the
death of this Murphy,” he added in the same sharp tone. “It’s a
violation of our sovereignty, of course. Would the gringos
allow our police to go and investigate the murder of a Dominican in New York, or Washington, or Miami? Let them
come. Let the world know we have nothing to hide.”

He was a meter away. Antonio could not endure Truyillo’s
unmoving gaze, and he blinked incessantly.

“My hand does not tremble when I have to kill,” he added,
after a pause. “Governing sometimes demands that you become stained with blood. I’ve often had to do that for this
country. But I am a man of honor. I do justice to those who
are loyal, I don’t have them killed. Octavio was loyal, a man of —
_ the regime, a proven Truyillista. Thats why I took a risk and
kept him out of prison when he went too far in London and
killed Luis Bernardino. Octavio’s death will be investigated.
You and your family can participate in the commission’s deliberations.”

He turned and, in-the same unhurried way, went back to

103
his desk. Why didn’t he attack when he had him so close? He
was still asking himself the question four and a half years later.
Not because he believed a word of what he was saying. That
was part of the melodrama that Trujillo was so fond of and
that the dictatorship superimposed on its crimes, like a sarcastic supplement to the tragic deeds it was built on. Why, then?
It wasn’t fear of dying, because fear of dying was never one of
the many defects he acknowledged in himself. Since the time
he was an insurgent and fought the dictator with a small band
of Horacistas, he had risked his life many times. It was something more subtle and indefinable than fear: it was the paralysis, the numbing of determination, reason, and free will, which
this man, groomed and adorned to the point of absurdity, with
his thin high-pitched voice and hypnotist’s eyes, imposed on
Dominicans, poor or rich, educated or ignorant, friends or enemies, and it was what held Antonio there, mute, passive, listening to those lies, the lone observer of the hoax, incapable of
acting on his desire to attack him and put an end to the
witches’ Sabbath that the history of the country had become.

“Furthermore, as proof that the regime considers the De la
Mazas a loyal family, this morning you have been granted the
concession for highway construction between Santiago and
Puerto Plata.”

He paused again, wet his lips with the tip of his tongue,
and concluded with a phrase that also said the interview had
ended:

“In this way yow'll be able to help Octavio’s widow. Poor
Altagracia must be having a difficult time. Give her my best,
and your parents too.”

Antonio left the National Palace more stupefied than if he
had been drinking all night. Had that been him? Had he heard
with his own ears what that son of a bitch said? Had he accepted explanations from Trujillo, even a business deal, a mess
of pottage that would allow him to pocket thousands of pesos,
so that he would swallow his bitterness and become an accomplice—yes, an accomplice—to Tavito’s murder? Why hadn’t he

104
dared even to accuse him, to say he knew very well that the
body thrown at his sister-in-law’s door had been murdered on
his orders, like Murphy before him, and that he had also created, with his melodramatic mind, the masquerade of the
gringo pilot's homosexuality and Tavito’s remorse for having
killed him.

Instead of returning to Moca that morning, Antonio,
without really knowing how, found himself in a cheap cabaret,
El Bombillo Rojo, at the corner of Vicente Noble and Barahona, whose owner, Loco Frias, organized dance contests. He
consumed vast quantities of rum, lost in thought, hearing as if
from a distance merengues with a Cibao flavor (“San Antonio,” “Con el Alma,” “Juanita Morel,” “Jarro Pichao,” among
others), and at a certain moment, without any explanation, he
tried to hit the maracas player in the band. His drunkenness
blurred the target, he punched the air, fell to the floor, and
could not get up again.

When he reached Moca a day later, pale, exhausted, and

with his clothes in ruins, his father, Don Vicente, his brother,
_ Emesto, his mother, and his wife, Aida, were in the family
house, waiting for him, horrified. It was his wife who spoke in
a trembling voice:

“Everybody’s saying that Trujillo shut you up with the
highway from Santiago to Puerto Plata. I don’t know how
many people have called.”

Antonio remembered his surprise when he heard Aida rebuke him in front of his parents and Ernesto. She was the
model Dominican wife, quiet, obliging, long-suffering, who
put up with his drunkenness, his affairs with women, his fighting, the nights he spent away from home, and always welcomed him with a smile, raising his spirits, willing to believe
his excuses when he bothered to give her any, and finding
comfort in Mass every Sunday, in novenas, confessions, and
prayers, for the troubles that filled her life.

“I couldn’t let myself be killed just for the sake of a gesture,” he said, dropping into the old rocking chair where Don

105
Vicente nodded off at siesta time. “I pretended I believed his
explanations, that I let myself be bought off.”

He spoke, feeling the weariness of centuries, the eyes of his
wife, of Ernesto and his parents, burning into his brain.

“What else could I do? Don’t think badly of me, Papa. I
swore I'd avenge Tavito. Pil do it, Mama. You'll never have to
be ashamed of me again, Aida. I swear it. I swear it again, to all
of you.”

Any moment now he would keep his oath. In ten minutes,
or one, the Chevrolet would appear, the one the old fox used
every week to go to Mahogany House in San Cristdbal, and,
according to their carefully drawn plan, the murderer of Galindez, of Murphy, Tavito, and the Mirabal sisters, of thousands
of Dominicans, would fall, cut to ribbons by the bullets of another of his victims, Antonio de la Maza, whom Trujillo had
also killed with a method that was slower and more perverse
than when he had his prey shot, beaten to death, or fed to the
sharks. He had killed him in stages, taking away his decency,
his honor, his self-respect, his joy in living, his hopes and desires, turning him into a sack of bones tormented by the guilty
conscience that had been destroying him gradually for so many
years. |

“Pm going to stretch my legs,” he heard Salvador Estrella
Sadhala say. “Theyre cramped from sitting so long.”

He saw Turk get out of the car and take a few steps along
the edge of the highway. Was Salvador feeling as much anguish as he? No doubt about it. And Tony Imbert and Amadito as well. And, up ahead, Roberto Pastoriza, Hudscar
Tejeda, and Pedro Livio Cedefio. Gnawed by the fear that
something or someone would prevent the Goat from keeping
this appointment. But it was with him that Trujillo had old accounts that needed to be settled. He had not harmed any of his
six companions, any of the dozens of others who, like Juan
Tomas Diaz, were involved in the conspiracy, as much as he
had harmed Antonio. He looked through the window: Turk
was shaking each leg energetically. He could see that Salvador

106
held his revolver in his hand. He watched him return to the car
and take his place in the back seat, next to Amadito.

“Well, if he doesn’t come we'll go to the Pony and have a
cold beer,” he heard him say morosely.

After their fight, he and Salvador did not see each other for
months. They would both be at the same social gathering and
not say hello. Their break heightened the torment in which he
lived. When the conspiracy was fairly well developed, Antonio
had the courage to show up at 21] Mahatma Gandhi and go directly to the living room where Salvador was sitting.

“It’s useless for us to scatter our efforts,” he said by way of
greeting. “Your plans to kill the Goat are childish. You and Imbert should join us. Our plan is worked out and can’t fail.”

Salvador looked into his eyes and said nothing. He made
no hostile gesture and did not throw him out of his house. 
“I have the support of the gringos,” Antonio explained,
lowering his voice. “ve spent two months discussing the details at the embassy. Juan Tomas Diaz has also been talking to
Consul Dearborn’s people. They'll give us weapons and explosives. We have high-ranking officers involved. You and Tony
should join us.”

“There are three of us,” Turk said finally. “Amadito Garcia
Guerrero became part of it a few days ago.”

Their reconciliation was only relative. They had not had
another serious argument during the months when the plan to
kill Trujillo was made, unmade, remade, with a different form
and a different date every month, every week, every day, because of the vacillations of the Yankees. The planeload of
weapons originally promised by the embassy was reduced, in
the end, to three rifles that were given to him not long ago by
his friend Lorenzo D. Berry, the owner of Wimpy’s Supermarket, who, to his astonishment, turned out to be the CIA’s man
in Ciudad Trujillo. In spite of these cordial meetings, when the
only topic was the plan in perpetual transformation, the old,
fraternal communication was not reestablished between
them—the jokes and confidences, the interweaving of shared

107
intimacies that existed, Antonio knew, among Turk, Imbert,
and Amadito, and from which he had been excluded ever since
the argument. Another piece of misery to hold the Goat responsible for: he had lost his friend forever.

His three companions in the car, and the other three waiting up ahead, may have been the people who knew least about
the conspiracy. It was possible they suspected certain other accomplices, but if something went wrong and they fell into
Johnny Abbes Garcia’s hands, and the caliés took them to La
Cuarenta and subjected them to their usual tortures, then
Turk, Imbert, Amadito, Hudscar, Pastoriza, and Pedro Livio
would not be able to implicate too many people. General Juan
Tomas Diaz, Luis Amiama Tid, two or three others. They
knew almost nothing about the rest, who included the most
important figures in the government, Pupo Roman, for example—head of the Armed Forces, the regime’s number-two
man—and myriad ministers, senators, civilian officials, and
high-ranking military officers who were informed about their
plans, had participated in their preparation or knew about
them indirectly, and had let it be known or understood or
guessed through intermediaries (as in the case of Balaguer himself, the theoretical President of the Republic) that once the
Goat was eliminated, they would be prepared to cooperate in
the political rebuilding, the eradication of the last dregs of Trujillism, the opening, the civilian-military junta that, with the
support of the United States, would guarantee order, block the
Communists, call for elections. Would the Dominican Republic finally be a normal country, with an elected government, a
free press, a system of justice worthy of the name? Antonio .
sighed. He had worked so hard for that and still he couldn’t
bring himself to believe it. In fact, he was the only one who
knew like the back of his hand the entire web of names and
complicities. Often, as one infuriating secret conversation followed another, and everything they had done collapsed and
they had to start building again out of nothing, he had felt exactly like a spider at the center of a labyrinth of threads that he

108
himself had spun, trapping a crowd of individuals who did not
know each other. He was the only one who knew them all.
Only he knew each person’s degree of involvement. And there
were so many! Not even he could remember how many now.
It was a miracle that with this country being what it was, and
the Dominicans being how they were, there had been no betrayal to wreck the entire scheme. Perhaps God was on their
side, as Salvador believed. The precautions had worked, all the
others knowing very little except their final objective, not
knowing the means, the circumstances, the moment. No more
than three or four people knew that the seven of them were
here tonight, knew whose hands would execute the Goat.

Sometimes he was overwhelmed at the thought that if
Johnny Abbes arrested him, he would have the only one who
could identify everyone involved. He was determined not to be
captured alive, to save the last bullet for himself. And he had
also taken the precaution of concealing in the hollow heel of
his shoe a strychnine-based poison pill prepared for him by a
pharmacist in Moca, who thought it was for killing a wild dog
that had been wreaking havoc in the henhouses on the ranch.
They wouldn’t get him alive, he wouldn’t give Johnny Abbes
the pleasure of watching him wnithe in the electric chair. When
Trujillo was dead, it would be a real pleasure to finish off the
head of the SIM. There would be more than enough volunteers. Most likely, when he found out about the Chief’s death,
Abbes would disappear. He must have made plans; he had to
know how much he was hated, how many people wanted revenge. Not only the opposition; ministers, senators, members
of the military said so openly.

Antonio lit another cigarette and smoked, biting down on
the tip to relieve his tension. Traffic had stopped altogether; for
some time not a truck or a car had passed in either direction.

The truth was, he said to himself, exhaling smoke from his
mouth and nose, he didn’t give a shit what happened later. The
crucial thing was what happened now. Seeing him dead so he
would know that his life had not been useless, that he hadn’t

109
passed through this world like a worthless creature.
“That bastard is never coming, damn it,” a furious Tony
Imbert exclaimed beside him.

110
