_ “What's new with Segundo?” asked Antonio de la Maza.
y Leaning against the steering wheel, Antonio Imbert
= = replied, not turning around:

«J saw him yesterday. They let me visit him every week
now. A short visit, half an hour. Sometimes the fucking warden of La Victoria decides to cut the visits to fifteen minutes.
Just to be a son of a bitch.”

“How ts he?”

How could someone be who, trusting in a promise of
amnesty, left Puerto Rico, where he had a good job working
for the Ferré family in Ponce, and returned to his country only
to discover that they were waiting to try him for the alleged
crime of a unionist that had been committed in Puerto Plata
years earlier, and sentence him to thirty years in prison? How
could a man feel who, if he had killed, did it for the regime,
and was repaid by Trujillo’s leaving him to rot in a dungeon
for the past five years?

But this was not his answer, because Imbert knew that Antonio de la Maza had not asked the question out of interest in
his brother Segundo but only to break the interminable waiting. He shrugged:

“Segundo has balls. If he’s having a tough time he doesn’t
show it. Sometimes he even gets a kick out of cheering me up.”

“You didn’t tell him anything about this.”

“Of course not. To be on the safe side, and not to give him
false hopes. Suppose it fails?”

“It won't fail,” Lieutenant Garcia Guerrero interjected
from the back seat. “The Goat is coming.”

Was he? Tony Imbert looked at his watch. He still might
come, no reason to lose hope. He never lost patience, and hadn’t

152

  
 
for many years. When he was young he did, unfortunately, and
that led him to do things he regretted with every cell in his
body. Like the telegram he sent in 1949, crazed with anger at
the landing of anti-Trujillistas, led by Horacio Julio Ornes, on
the beach at Luperén in the province of Puerto Plata, when he
was governor. “Give the order and [ll burn Puerto Plata,
Chief.” The words he regretted most in his life. He saw them
printed in every newspaper, for the Generalissimo wanted all Dominicans to know how much of a dedicated, fanatical Trujillista the young governor was.

Why did Horacio Julio Ornes, Félix Cérdoba Boniche,
Tulio Hostilio Arvelo, Gugu Henriquez, Miguelucho Feliu,
Salvador Reyes Valdéz, Federico Horacio, and the rest choose
Puerto Plata on that long-ago June 19 in 1949? The expedition was a resounding failure. One of the two invading airplanes could not even fly the distance and returned to the
island of Cozumel. The Catalina, carrying Horacio Julio Ornes
and his companions, landed on the water near the muddy coast
of Luperdén, but before the expeditionary force could climb
out, a Coast Guard cutter fired on the plane and destroyed it.
In a few hours Army patrols captured the invaders. That permitted the kind of farcical show Trujillo liked so much. He
granted amnesty to the prisoners, including Horacio Julio
Omes, and in a show of power and magnanimity allowed them
to go into exile again. But as he was making this gesture of
generosity for the outside world, the governor of Puerto Plata,
Antonio Imbert, and his brother, Major Segundo Imbert, military commander of the province, were stripped of their rank,
imprisoned, and beaten, and a merciless reprisal was carried
out against supposed accomplices, who were arrested, tor- tured, and often shot in secret. “Accomplices who weren’t accomplices,” he thinks. “They thought everybody would rise up
when they saw them land. In fact, nobody was with them.”
Too many innocents had to pay for their fantasy.

How many innocents would have to pay if tonight’s plan
failed? Antonio Imbert was not as optimistic as Amadito or

153
Salvador Estrella Sadhala; when they learned from Antonio de
la Maza that General José René (Pupo) Roman, head of the
Armed Forces, was involved in the plot, they became convinced that once Trujillo was dead, everything would go like
clockwork: the military, obeying Roman’s orders, would detain the Goat’s brothers, kill Johnny Abbes and the die-hard
Truyjillistas, and install a civilian-military junta. The people
would take to the streets and, overjoyed at gaining their freedom, exterminate the cals. Would things turn out that way?
Disillusionment, ever since the stupid ambush to which Segundo fell victim, had made Antonio Imbert allergic to premature enthusiasm. He wanted to see Trujillo’s corpse lying at his
feet; the rest of it mattered less to him. Ridding the country of
that man was the main thing. When that obstacle was out of
the way, even if things didn’t go so well at first, at least a door
would be opened. And that justified what they were doing
tonight, even if none of them survived.

No, Tony had not said a word about the conspiracy to his
brother Segundo on his weekly visits to him at La Victoria.
They talked about the family, about baseball and boxing, and
Segundo told him stories about the prison routine, but they
avoided the only important topic. On his last visit, as he was
saying goodbye, Antonio whispered: “Things are going to
change, Segundo.” A word to the wise. Had he guessed? After
a series of crushing blows, Segundo, like Tony, had gone from
enthusiastic Trujillista to a man disaffected with the regime to
conspirator, and long ago had concluded that the only way to
put an end to the tyranny was by killing the tyrant; everything
else was useless. You had to eradicate the person in whom all
the strands of the dread spiderweb converged.

“What would have happened if the bomb had exploded on
Maximo Gomez when the Goat was taking his walk?” Amadito
fantasized. .

“Truyillista fireworks in the sky,” replied Imbert.

“I could have been one of the firecrackers if I had been on
duty,” the lieutenant said with a laugh.

154
“I would have sent a huge wreath of roses to your funeral,”
said Tony.

“What a plan,” Estrella Sadhald remarked. “Blowing up the
Goat and all his cronies. Heartless!”

“Well, I knew you wouldn’t be part of his escort,” said Imbert. “Besides, when that happened I hardly knew you, Amadito. Now I would have to give it a little more thought.”

“That’s a relief,” said the lieutenant, thanking him.

They had been waiting on the road to San Cristdébal for
more than an hour, and had tried several times to have a conversation, or to joke, as they were doing now, but those efforts
had petered out and each man enclosed himself again in his
own torments, hopes, or memories. At one point Antonio de
la Maza turned on the radio, but as soon as he heard the honeyed voice on the Voice of the Tropics announcing a program
on spiritualism, he turned it off.

Yes, in the failed plan to kill the Goat two and a half years
earlier, Antonio Imbert had been prepared to blow up, along
~ with Trujillo, many of the toadies who escorted him every afternoon on his walk from the house of Dofia Julia, the Sublime
Matriarch, along Maximo Godmez and the Avenida, to the
obelisk. Weren’t the men who accompanied him the dirtiest and
most bloodstained? It would be a service to the country to eradicate so many of his henchmen at the same time as the tyrant.

He prepared the assault alone, not even telling his best
friend, Salvador Estrella Sadhald, because even though Turk
was an anti-Trujillista, Tony was afraid he would disapprove
because of his Catholicism. He planned it and thought it out in
his own mind, bringing to it all the resources at his disposal,
convinced that the fewer the people involved, the greater its
chances for success. Not until the final stage did he include in
his project two boys from what would later be called the June
14 Movement; at that time, it-was a clandestine group of
young professionals and students trying to organize in order to
take action, though they didn’t know what kind, against
tyranny. |

155
His plan was simple and practical. It took advantage of the
maniacal discipline that Trujillo brought to his routine activities, in this case his evening walk along Maximo Gomez and
the Avenida. He studied the terrain carefully, going back and
forth along the avenue lined with the residences of the regime’s
top men, past and present. The ostentatious house of Héctor
(Blacky) Trujillo, his brother’s puppet president for two terms.
The pink mansion of Mama Julia, the Sublime Matriarch,
whom the Chief visited every afternoon before setting out on
his walk. The house of Luis Rafael Trujillo Molina, nicknamed
Kid, who was mad for cockfights. And the houses of General
Arturo (Razor) Espaillat, and of Joaquin Balaguer, the current
puppet president, which stood next to the nuncio’s residence.
The elegant dwelling that once belonged to Anselmo Paulino
was now one of Ramfis Trujillo’s houses. The mansion of the
Goat’s daughter, the beautiful Angelita, and her husband,
Colonel Luis José (Pechito) Leén Estévez. The residence of the
Caceres Troncoso family, and the palatial home of the Vicini
tycoons. Adjoining Maximo Gémez was a ball field that Trujillo built for his sons across from Radhamés Manor and the lot
once occupied by the house of General Ludovino Fernandez,
whom the Goat had ordered killed. Separating the mansions
were large open spaces filled with weeds and protected by
green-painted wire fences erected along the edge of the sidewalk. On the right side of the street, where the entourage always walked, there were vacant lots surrounded by the same
wire fencing, which Antonio Imbert had spent many hours
studying.

He chose the piece of fence that started at Kid Trujillo’s
house. On the pretext of replacing part of the fencing around
Ready-Mix, the cement factory where he was manager (it belonged to Paco Martinez, the Bountiful First Lady’s brother),
he bought several dozen meters of wire fencing and the metal
poles that were placed every fifteen meters to hold the fence
taut. He verified personally that the poles were hollow and
could be filled with sticks of dynamite. Since Ready-Mix

156
owned two quarries on the outskirts of Ciudad Trujillo, from
which raw materials were extracted, it was easy for him, on his
periodic visits, to take away sticks of dynamite and hide them
in his own office: he always came in before anyone else and left
after the last employee had gone home.

When everything was ready, he told his plan to Luis
Goémez Pérez and Ivan Tavares Castellanos. Younger than he,
they were at the university, studying law and engineering, respectively. They belonged to his cell of the clandestine antiTrujillista groups; after observing them for many weeks, he
decided they were serious, trustworthy, and eager to take action. Both accepted enthusiastically. They agreed not to say a
word to their comrades, with whom they met in groups of
eight or ten, always in a different location, to discuss the best
way to mobilize the people against the dictatorship.

With Luis and Ivan, who turned out to be even better than
he had hoped, Tony filled the poles with sticks of dynamite,
and placed the caps after testing them with a remote control.
To be certain of their timing, they practiced in the empty lot of
the factory after the workers and clerical staff had left, to see
how long they needed to take down a piece of existing fence
and put up a new one, replacing the old posts with ones full of
dynamite. Less than five hours. Everything was ready on June
12. They planned to act on June 15, when Trujillo returned
from a trip to Cibao. They had at their disposal a dump truck
that would knock down the piece of fence at dawn, so they
would have a pretext—wearing the blue overalls of Municipal
Services—to replace it with the armed one. They marked two
points, each less than fifty paces from the explosion, where,
with Imbert to the right and Luis and Ivan to the left, they
would activate the remote controls in quick succession, the
first blast to kill Trujillo at the moment he passed in front of
the poles, and the second to make sure he was dead.

And then, on June 14, 1959, the eve of the day they had
decided on, in the mountains of Constanza, it happened—the
unexpected landing of an airplane from Cuba, painted with the

157
colors and insignia of the Dominican Air Force and carrying
anti-Truyjillista guerrillas, followed a week later by landings on
the beaches of Maimon and Estero Hondo. The arrival of that
small detachment, which included the bearded Cuban comandante Delio Gémez Ochoa, sent a chill down the spine of the
regime. It was a rash, uncoordinated attempt. The clandestine
groups had absolutely no information regarding what was being prepared in Cuba. The support of Fidel Castro for the uprising against Trujillo had been, since the fall of Batista six
months earlier, an obsessive topic at their meetings. They
counted on that help in every plan they put together and then
took apart, and for which they were amassing hunting rifles,
revolvers, old shotguns. But no one Imbert knew was in touch
with Cuba or had any idea that June 14 would see the arrival of
dozens of revolutionaries; after putting the handful of guards
at the Constanza airport out of commission, they fled to the
nearby mountains, only to be hunted down like rabbits in the
days that followed, and killed on the spot or taken to Ciudad
Trujillo, where, on Ramfis’s orders, almost all of them were
murdered (but not the Cuban Gomez Ochoa and his adopted
son, Pedrito Mirabal, whom the regime, in another of its
theatrical gestures, returned some time later to Fidel Castro).
And no one could have suspected the magnitude of the repression the government would unleash after the landing. In
the ensuing weeks and months, it intensified rather than subsided. The caliés seized all suspects and took them to the SIM,
where they were subjected to torture—castration, bursting
their eardrums, gouging out their eyes, sitting them on the
Throne—to force them to name names. La Victoria, La
Cuarenta, and El] Nueve were overflowing with young people
of both sexes—students, professionals, and office workers—
many of them the children or relatives of men in the government. Trujillo was dumbfounded: was it possible that the
children, grandchildren, nieces and nephews of the people who
had benefited most from the regime were plotting against him?
They were shown no consideration despite their family names,

158
white faces, and middle-class trappings.

Luis Gémez Pérez and Ivan Tavares Castellanos fell into
the hands of the caliés of the SIM on the morning of the day
scheduled for the attack. With his customary realism, Antonio
Imbert knew he had no possibility of seeking asylum: all the
embassies were surrounded by lines of uniformed police, soldiers, and cali¢s. He calculated that, under torture, Luis, Ivan,
or anyone else from the clandestine groups would mention his
name and the caliés would come for him. Then, just as he did
tonight, he knew exactly what to do: welcome them with lead.
He would try to send a few of them into the next world before
he was cut to ribbons. He was not going to let them pull out
his nails with pliers, cut out his tongue, or sit him in the electric chair. Kill him, yes; abuse him, never.

On some pretext or other he sent his wife, Guarina, and his
daughter, Leslie, who knew nothing of his activities, to the
farm of some relatives in La Romana, and with a glass of rum
in his hand, he sat down to wait. He had a loaded revolver,
with the safety off, in his pocket. But the caliés did not come
that day, or the next, or the one after that, to his house, or to
his office at Ready-Mix, where he continued to show up punctually with all the sangfroid he could muster. Luis and Ivan
had not betrayed him, and neither had the people he knew in
the clandestine groups. Miraculously, he escaped a repression
that struck at the guilty and the innocent, filled the prisons,
and for the first time in the twenty-nine years of the regime,
terrorized the families of the middle class, Trujillo’s traditional
mainstays and the source of most of the prisoners, members of
what was called, in response to the frustrated invasion, the
June 14 Movement. Tony’s cousin Ramon (Moncho) Imbert
Rainieri was one of its leaders.

Why did he escape? Because of the courage of Luis and
Ivan, no doubt—two years later they were still in the dungeons
of La Victoria—and the courage, no doubt, of other girls and
boys in June 14 who forgot to name him. Perhaps they considered him merely an onlooker, not an activist. Tony Imbert was

159
so shy that he rarely opened his mouth at the meetings Moncho took him to for the first time; he would only listen, or offer a monosyllabic opinion. And it was unlikely he was in the
files of the SIM except as the brother of Major Segundo Imbert. His service record was clean. He had spent his life working for the regime—as an inspector general on the railroad,
governor of Puerto Plata, general supervisor of the National
Lottery, director of the office that issued identity papers—and
as manager at Ready-Mix, a factory that belonged to Trujillo’s
son-in-law. Why would they suspect him?

Very cautiously, in the days following June 14, he stayed at
the factory at night, dismantled the sticks of dynamite and returned them to the quarries, while he pondered how and with
whom he would carry out the next plan to do away with Trujillo. He confessed everything that had happened (and failed to
happen) to his dearest friend, Salvador (Turk) Estrella Sadhala,
who berated Tony for not including him in the Maximo
Gomez plot. Salvador had reached the same conclusion on his
own: nothing would change as long as Trujillo was alive. They
began to propose and discard possible methods of attack, but
said nothing in front of Amadito, the third man in their trio: it
was hard to believe that a military adjutant would want to kill
the Benefactor.

Not long afterward, the traumatic episode in Amadito’s career occurred—in order to obtain his promotion, he had to kill
a prisoner (his ex-fiancée’s brother, he believed) —that brought
him into the game. It would soon be two years since the landings at Constanza, Maimon, and Estero Hondo. One year,
eleven months, and fourteen days, to be exact. Antonio Imbert
looked at his watch. He probably wasn’t coming.

So many things had happened in the Dominican Republic,
in the world, and in his personal life. So many. The massive
dragnets of January 1960, into which so many boys and girls
of the June 14 Movement fell, among them the Mirabal sisters
and their husbands. Trujillo’s break with his old accomplice,
the Catholic Church, after the Pastoral Letter of January 1960,

160
in which the bishops denounced the dictatorship. The attempt
against President Betancourt of Venezuela, in June 1960, that
mobilized so many countries against Trujillo, including his ©
great ally the United States, which voted in favor of sanctions
on August 6, 1960, at the conference in Costa Rica. And, on
November 25, 1960—Imbert felt the inevitable piercing in his
chest every time he recalled that dismal day—the murder of the
three sisters, Minerva, Patria, and Maria Teresa Mirabal, and
their driver, in La Cumbre, in the northern mountain range,
on their way home from visiting Minerva’s and Maria Teresa’s
husbands, imprisoned in the Fortress of Puerto Plata.

The entire Dominican Republic learned about the killing
in the rapid, mysterious way that news circulated from mouth
to mouth and house to house and in a few hours reached the
most remote corners of the country, though not a line appeared in the press, and often, as it circulated, the news transmitted by human’ tom-tom was colored, diminished,
exaggerated until it turned into myth, legend, fiction, with almost no connection to real events. He recalled that night on
the Malec6n, not very far from where he was now, six months
later, waiting for the Goat—to avenge the Mirabal sisters too.
They were sitting on the stone railing, as they did every
night—he, Salvador, Amadito, and, on this occasion, Antonio
_ de la Maza—to enjoy the cool breeze and to talk, away from
prying ears. What had happened to the Mirabal sisters set their
teeth on edge, it turned their stomachs as they discussed the
deaths of the three incredible women, high in the mountains,
in an alleged car accident.

“They kill our fathers, our brothers, our friends. And now
they’re killing our women. And here we sit, resigned, waiting
our turn,” he heard himself say.

“Not resigned, Tony,” Antonio de la Maza objected. He
had come from Restauracién, and had brought the news of the
death of the Mirabal sisters, which he had heard along the way.
“Trujillo will pay. A plan’s in motion. But it has to be done
night.”

161
At that time, an attempt was being planned in Moca, during a visit by Trujillo to the land of the De la Maza family, on
one of the trips through the country that he had been making
since the condemnation by the OAS and the imposition of
economic sanctions. A bomb would go off in the main church,
consecrated to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, and a rain of rifle fire
would fall on Trujillo from the balconies, terraces, and clock
tower as he spoke on the platform erected in the atrium to a
crowd gathered around the statue of St. John Bosco, partially
covered by heartsease. Imbert himself inspected the church and
volunteered to hide in the clock tower, the most dangerous
place in the church.

“Tony knew the Mirabals,” Turk explained to Antonio.
“That’s why he’s so upset.”

He knew them, though he couldn’t say they were frends.
He had occasionally met the three sisters, and Minerva’s and
Patria’s husbands, Manolo Tavares Justo and Leandro
Guzman, at the meetings at which the June 14 Movement was
organized, taking the historic Trinitaria de Duarte as their
model. The three women were leaders of the small, enthusiastic, but disorganized and inefficient organization that the repression was destroying. They had made an impression on him
because of the conviction and boldness they brought to an unequal and uncertain struggle, Minerva Mirabal in particular. It
happened to everyone who met her and heard her give opinions, hold discussions, offer proposals, or make decisions.
Though he hadn’t thought about it earlier, after the killing
Tony Imbert told himself that until he knew Minerva Mirabal,
it had never occurred to him that a woman could dedicate herself to things as manly as planning a revolution, obtaining and
hiding weapons, dynamite, Molotov cocktails, knives, bayonets, talking about assassination attempts, strategy, and tactics,
and dispassionately discussing whether, in the event they fell
into the hands of the SIM, activists ought to swallow poison to
avoid the risk of betraying their comrades under torture.

Minerva spoke about these things, and about the best way

162
to engage in clandestine propaganda or recruit university students, and everyone listened to her. Because of her intelligence
and the clarity with which she spoke. Her firm convictions and
eloquence gave her words a strength that was contagious. And
she was beautiful as well, with black hair and eyes, delicate features, finely drawn nose and mouth, and dazzling white teeth
that contrasted with the bluish cast of her skin. Very beautiful,
yes. There was something powerfully feminine in her, a delicacy, a natural flirtatiousness in her movements and smiles, despite the somber clothing she wore to meetings. Tony did not
recall ever seeing her in makeup. Yes, very beautiful, but—he
thought—none of the men would ever have dared to pay her
one of those compliments, say one of those playful, witty
things that were normal, natural—obligatory—for Dominican
men, especially if they were young, and united by the intense
brotherhood created by shared ideals, illusions, and dangers.
Something in Minerva Mirabal’s self-assured presence kept
men from taking the informal liberties they allowed themselves
with other women.

By then, she was already a legend in the small world of the
clandestine struggle against Trujillo. Which of the things they
said about her were true, which were exaggerated, which invented? No one would have presumed to ask her, no one
wanted to receive that deep, scornful look or one of those cutting replies with which she sometimes silenced an opponent.
They said that as a teenager she dared to rebuff Trujillo himself
by refusing to dance with him, and for that reason her father
was deposed as mayor of Ojo de Agua and sent to prison. Others suggested that it was more than a rebuff, that she had
slapped him because while they were dancing he fondled her
and said something obscene, a possibility that many rejected
(“She wouldn’t be alive, he would have killed her or had her
killed on the spot”), but not Antonio Imbert. From the first
time he saw and heard her, he did not doubt for a second that if
the slap wasn’t the truth, it could have been. It was enough to
see and hear Minerva Mirabal for only a few minutes (talking,

163
for example, with icy naturalness about the need to prepare activists psychologically to resist torture) to know she was capable
of slapping even Trujillo if he showed a lack of respect. She had
been arrested several times, and stories were told about her fearlessness, first in La Cuarenta, and then in La Victoria, where she
went on a hunger strike, withstood solitary confinement on
bread and worm-infested water, and where, they said, she was
savagely mistreated. She never spoke of her time in prison, or
about the torture, or about the calvary her family had lived since
it was known she was an anti-Trujillista: they had been
hounded, had their few goods confiscated, and been placed under house arrest. The dictatorship allowed Minerva to study the
law so that when she finished—a well-planned vengeance—it
could deny her a professional license—that is, condemn her to
not working, to not earning a living, to feeling frustrated in the
prime of her youth, having studied five years for nothing. But
none of that made her bitter; she went on tirelessly, encouraging everyone, an engine that would not stop, a prelude— Imbert
often told himself—to the young, beautiful, enthusiastic, idealistic country the Dominican Republic would be one day.

He was embarrassed as he felt his eyes filling with tears. He
lit a cigarette and took several drags, blowing the smoke toward the ocean, where moonlight glimmered and played.
There was no breeze now. Occasionally, the headlights of a car
appeared in the distance, coming from Ciudad Trujillo. The
four would sit up straight, crane their necks, tensely scrutinize
the darkness, but each time, when the car was twenty or thirty
meters away, they discovered it wasn’t the Chevrolet and
slumped back in their seats, disappointed.

The one who controlled his emotions best was Imbert. He
had always been quiet, but in recent years, since the idea of
killing Trujillo had taken possession of him and, like a hermit
crab, fed on all his energy, his silence had intensified. He had
never had many friends; in the last few months, his life had
been bounded by his office at Ready-Mix, his home, and his
daily meetings with Estrella Sadhal4 and Lieutenant Garcia

164
Guerrero. Following the death of the Mirabal sisters, clandestine meetings had practically ceased. The repression crushed
the June 14 Movement. Those who escaped withdrew into
family life, trying to go unnoticed. From time to time a question would torment him: “Why wasn’t I arrested?” Uncertainty
made him feel ill, as if he were guilty of something, as if he were
responsible for how much others had suffered at the hands of
Johnny Abbes while he continued to enjoy his freedom.

A very relative freedom, it’s true. When he understood the
kind of regime he was living under, the kind of government he
had served since he was a young man, and was still serving—
what else was he doing as manager at one of the clan’s factories? —he felt like a prisoner. Perhaps it was to rid himself of
the feeling that all his steps were controlled, every path he took
and all his movements tracked, that the idea of eliminating
Trujillo took hold so firmly in his consciousness. His disenchantment with the regime was gradual, long, and secret, beginning much earlier than the political difficulties of his
brother Segundo, who had been even more of a Trujillista than
he. Who around him had not been a Trujillista for the past
twenty, twenty-five years? They all thought the Goat was the
savior of the Nation, the man who ended the caudillo wars, did
away with the threat of a new invasion from Haiti, called a halt
to a humiliating dependency on the United States—which
. controlled customs, prohibited a Dominican currency, and approved the budget—and, whether they were willing or not,
brought the country’s best minds into the government. Compared to that, what did it matter if Trujillo fucked any woman
he wanted? Or swallowed up factories, farms, and livestock?
Wasn’t he increasing Dominican prosperity? Hadn’t he given
this country the most powerful Armed Forces in the
Caribbean? For twenty years Tony Imbert had said and defended these things. That was what turned his stomach now.

He couldn’t remember how it began, the first doubts, conjectures, discrepancies that led him to wonder if everything
really was going so well, or if, behind the facade of a country that

165
under the severe but inspired leadership of an extraordinary
statesman was moving ahead at a quickstep, lay a grim spectacle of people destroyed, mistreated, and deceived, the enthronement, through propaganda and violence, of a monstrous
lie. Drops falling tirelessly, one after the other, boring a hole in
his Trujillism. When he was no longer governor of Puerto
Plata, deep in his heart he stopped being a Truyillista; he had
become convinced the regime was dictatorial and corrupt. He
told no one, not even Guarina. The face he showed the world
was still Trujillista, and even though his brother Segundo had
gone into exile in Puerto Rico, the regime, as a demonstration
of its magnanimity, continued to give positions to Antonio,
even—what greater proof of confidence?—in the Trujillo family enterprises.

It had been this malaise of so many years’ duration—thinking one thing and doing something that contradicted it every
day—that led him, in the secret recesses of his mind, to condemn Trujillo to death, to convince himself that as long as Trujillo lived, he and many other Dominicans would be
condemned to this awful queasy sickness of constantly having
to lie to themselves and deceive everyone else, of having to be
two people in one, a public lie and a private truth that could
not be expressed.

The decision did him good; it raised his morale. His life
stopped being a mortifying duplicity when he could share his
true feelings with someone else. His friendship with Salvador
Estrella Sadhal4 was like a gift from heaven. With Turk he
could talk freely against everything around him; his moral integrity, the sincerity with which he tried to accommodiate his
behavior to the religion he professed with a devotion Tony had
never seen in anyone else, made Salvador his model as well as
his best friend.

Shortly after they became close friends, Imbert began to
frequent clandestine groups, thanks to his cousin Moncho.
Although he left the meetings with the feeling that these girls
and boys were risking their freedom, their futures, their lives

166
but would not find an effective way to fight Trujillo, the hour
or two he spent with them after arriving at a strange house—
a different one each time, taking a thousand detours, following messengers identified with different code names—gave
_ him a reason for living, cleared his conscience, and centered
his life.

Guarina was dumbstruck when finally, so that some
calamity would not take her completely by surprise, Tony began revealing to her that, contrary to all appearances, he was
no longer a Trujillista and was even working in secret against
the government. She did not try to dissuade him. She did not
ask what would happen to their daughter, Leslie, if he was arrested and sentenced to thirty years in prison, like Segundo, or,
even worse, if they killed him.

His wife and daughter did not know about tonight; they
thought he was playing cards at Turks house. What would
happen to them if this failed?

“Do you trust General Roman?” he said hurriedly, to force
himself to think about something else. “Are you sure he’s one
of us?” Pupo Roman, married to Trujillo’s niece, was the
brother-in-law of Generals José and Virgilio Garcia Trujillo,
the Chief’s favorite nephews.

“If he weren’t with us, we'd all be in La Cuarenta by now,”
. said Antonio de la Maza. “He’s with us as long as we meet his
conditions: he has to see the body.” |

“It’s hard to believe,” Tony murmured. “What does the
‘Minister of the Armed Forces stand to gain from this? He has
everything to lose.”

“He hates Trujillo more than you and I do,” replied De la
Maza. “And so do many of the men at the top. Trujillism is a
house of cards. It'll collapse, you'll see. Pupo has commitments
from a lot of men in the military; they're only waiting for his
orders. He'll give them, and tomorrow this will be a different
country.”

“If the Goat comes,” Estrella Sadhala grumbled in the back
seat.

167
“He'll come, Turk, he’ll come,” the lieutenant repeated one
more time.

Antonio Imbert sank again into his honghes, Would his
country wake tomorrow to find itself liberated? He wanted
that with all his strength, but even now, minutes before they
would act, it was hard for him to believe. How many people
were in the conspiracy besides General Roman? He never
wanted to find out. He knew about four or five, but there were
many more. Better not to know. He always thought it crucial
that the conspirators know as little as possible so as not to put
the operation at risk. He had listened with interest to everything Antonio de la Maza told them about the commitment
the head of the Armed Forces had made to assume power if
they executed the tyrant. In this way the Goat's close relatives
and the leading Trujillistas would be captured or killed before
they could unleash a series of reprisals. Just as well that his two
boys, Ramfis and Radhamés, were in Paris. How many people
had Antonio de la Maza talked to? At times, in the endless
meetings of the past few months to revise the plan, Antonio
had let slip allusions, references, half-spoken words that suggested there were many people involved. Tony had taken caution to the extreme of cutting Salvador off one day when he
began to say in indignation that he and Antonio de la Maza, at
a meeting in the house of General Juan Tomas Diaz, had argued with a group of conspirators who objected to bringing
Imbert into the plot. They didn’t think he was safe because of
his Trujillista past; somebody recalled the famous telegram to
Trujillo, offering to burn Puerto Plata. (“It will follow me to
my death and beyond,” he thought.) Turk and Antonio had
protested, saying they would put their hands to the fire for
Tony, but he would not allow Salvador to continue:

“I don’t want to know, Turk. After all, why would people
who don’t know me ever trust me? They’re right, ’'ve worked
my whole life for Trujillo, directly or indirectly.”

“And what do I do?” replied Turk. “What do thirty or
forty percent of Dominicans do? Aren’t we all working for the

168
government or its businesses? Only the very rich can allow
themselves the luxury of not working for Trujillo.”

“Not them either,” he thought. The rich too, if they
wanted to go on being rich, had to ally themselves with the
Chief, sell him part of their businesses or buy part of his, and
contribute in this way to his greatness and power. With halfclosed eyes, lulled by the gentle sound of the sea, he thought of
what a perverse system Trujillo created, one in which all Dominicans sooner or later took part as accomplices, a system which
only exiles (not always) and the dead could escape. In this
country, in one way or another, everyone had been, was, or
would be part of the regime. “The worst thing that can happen
to a Dominican is to be intelligent or competent,” he had once
heard Agustin Cabral say (“A very intelligent and competent
Dominican,” he told himself) and the words had been etched
in his mind: “Because sooner or later Trujillo will call upon
him to serve the regime, or his person, and when he calls, one
is not permitted to say no.” He was proof of this truth. It never
occurred to him to put up the slightest resistance to his appointments. As Estrella Sadhala always said, the Goat had
taken from people the sacred attribute given to them by God:
their free will.

In contrast to Turk, religion had never occupied a central place
in the life of Antonio Imbert. He was Catholic in the Dominican

way, he had gone through all the religious ceremonies that
marked people’s lives—baptism, confirmation, first communion, Catholic school, marriage in the Church—and he undoubtedly would be buried with the sermon and blessing of a
priest. But he had never been a particularly conscientious believer, never been concerned with the implications of his faith
in everyday life, never bothered to verify if his behavior complied with the commandments, as Salvador did in a way that he
found debilitating.

But what he said about free will affected him. Perhaps this
was why he decided that Trujillo had to die. So that he and
other Dominicans could recover their ability to at least accept

169
or reject the work they did to earn a living. Tony did not know
what that was like. Perhaps as a child he knew, but he had forgotten. It must be nice. Your cup of coffee or glass of rum
must taste better, the smoke of your cigar, a swim in the ocean
on a hot day, the movie you see on Saturday, the merengue on
the radio, everything must leave a more pleasurable sensation
in your body and spirit when you had what Trujillo had taken
away from Dominicans thirty-one years ago: free will.

170
